 1 
                                                                                 
                    
 
 
 
The Anti Money Laundering Regulation of 
Crypto-assets in Europe 
A Critical Analysis 
 
Giulio Soana 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Prof. Antonio Gullo – LUISS Guido Carli University 
Prof. Michele Panzavolta – KU Leuven 
 

 2 
Alla mia famiglia per avermi sempre sopportato e supportato 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
Table of Contents 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
1. Understanding Money Laundering 
1.1 The criminology of money laundering. Layering, placement, and integration 
2. A brief history of the anti-money laundering regulation 
3. Structure  
4. Methodology 
 
1. From Bitcoin to e-Renmibi. A brief history of blockchain 
 
1. Introduction 
2. The origins story. Cypherpunks, cryptography, and Lehman 
3. The development. On decentralization, or a tale of human nature 
3.1 The law of the jungle. The centralization of mining 
3.2 From code is law to code without law. Ethereum and the DAO project 
4. The future. Orwell or Rousseau? 
5. Final Remarks 
 
2. Understanding blockchain. The technological background 
 
1. Introduction 
2. The blockchain record-keeping mechanism. Trustless trust? 
3. The storage model 
3.1 The storage of the data 
3.2 The storage of the ledger 
4. The consensus protocol 
5. The transaction model and asymmetric cryptography  
 4 
6. Privacy within the blockchain. Pseudonymity or anonymity? 
7. A key distinction: permissioned and permissionless blockchains  
8. The smart contracts  
 
3. Tracing the Regulatory Corral. An analysis of the object and subjects of the 
regulation: the definition of virtual asset and virtual asset service providers 
 
1. A brief introduction to the financial flows control strategy 
2. Understanding the crypto risk. Governance and access disintermediation 
 
Part one: Setting the stage. The definitory conundrum 
 
1. The Financial Action Task Force  
1.1 The first definition. The Financial Action Task Force’s Guidance of 2015 and the definition 
of virtual currencies 
1.1.1 The “currency” aspect of the virtual currency definition 
1.1.2 The “virtual” aspect of the virtual currency definition 
1.2 From virtual currency to virtual asset. Same old, same old? 
1.3 Missing the target. A critique of the FATF approach 
2 The European Dimension 
2.1 The first definition. The Fifth Anti-money laundering Directive  
2.2 A new European approach. The Market in Crypto-assets Regulation 
2.2.1 The definition of the token 
2.2.2 The definition of the technology 
2.2.3 Assessing the Market in Crypto-assets Regulation. Customized, just not enough? 
3 Going back to the roots. A proposal for a money laundering specific definition of crypto-asset  
4 Outside of the Regulatory corral. The strange case of unique and non-fungible tokens (NFTS) 
Part two: The regulated entities. How to find intermediaries in disintermediated world 
 
1 The first phase: fencing the market 
1.1 The 2015 Financial Action Task Force Guidance 
1.2 The Fifth Anti-Money Laundering Directive 
 5 
1.3 The thorns in the side of the first regulatory strategy. Short- and long-term trends 
2 The second phase. the Regulation of the Market 
2.1 Exchangers 
2.2 Transfer  
2.3 Safekeeping  
2.4 Participation in and provision of financial services related to an issuer’s offer and/or sale  
3 The Market in Crypto-assets Regulation 
3.1 The definition of CASP 
3.1.1 The custodian wallet provider 
3.1.2 The platform operators and exchangers 
3.1.3 The provision of transfer services 
3.1.4 The provision of advisory services and portfolio management 
3.1.5 The middlemen 
3.2 The authorization system 
3.2.1 The offer of crypto-assets, other than asset-referenced tokens or e-money tokens 
3.2.2 The offer of asset-referenced tokens 
3.2.3 The issuance of e-money tokens 
3.2.4 Significant asset and e-money tokens 
3.2.5 Crypto-asset service providers 
3.3. The AML Package 
3.3.1 The Anti-money Laundering Package and Crypto-assets 
Part three: Final Remarks 
 
4. The Anti-money laundering compliance duties. Same old, same old? 
 
1. Introduction 
2. The Anti-money Laundering Compliance Duties. A recap 
2.1 The risk-based approach 
2.2 Profiling and monitoring. The Customer Due Diligence 
2.3 The endgame of anti-money laundering compliance: the Suspicious Activity Reports  
2.4 The sanctioning infrastructure 
3. The application of the anti-money laundering regulation to crypto-assets 
 6 
3.1 The EBA’s red flag indicators. The anti-money laundering regulation in motion 
4. The registration duties. A way in for ex-ante compliance 
4.1 The European Approach. Between the Fifth Directive, MiCaR, and the Anti -money 
Laundering Package 
4.2 The Registration regime and Decentralized Autonomous Organizations. A few thoughts. 
5 The Travel Rule Regulation. A primer for architectural policy-making? 
5.1 An introduction to the Travel Rule 
5.2 The extension of the Travel Rule to the crypto-assets’ market 
5.3 The European take on the Travel Rule. A primer for architectural regulation? 
5.4 The final text. Postpone, postpone, postpone? 
6 Blockchain analytics and compliance. A new tool for anti-money laundering? 
6.1 Blockchain analysis tools: tracing, clustering, and pattern analysis 
6.2 Blockchain analytics. Opens questions and future regulatory avenues 
6.3 A brief excursus. Blockchain analytics and privacy 
 
5. Reigning Decentralized Arrangements. DAOs between covered and excluded 
entities 
 
1. Introduction 
2. A quest for control. Identifying governance in decentralized autonomous organizations 
3. Compliance-by-design and software developers. Pushing back the compliance threshold 
4. The Parliament’s proposal for the Market in Crypto-assets Regulation. Lights and shades of 
an attempt to customized compliance 
5. A cautionary tale: the Tornado Cash case 
6. Closing remarks 
 
Closing remarks 
 
 
 7 
Glossary 
 
Application specific integrated circuit (ASIC): a hardware specifically designed to perform a 
certain function. In the blockchain field it refers to hardware specifically designed to perform 
mining function. 
Asymmetric Cryptography: technique that allows to party to securely share encrypted messages 
without having to share a common description key. 
Bitcoin: crypto-asset created. Launched in 2009 by Satoshi Nakamoto, which real identity is still 
unknown, it is rooted in a permissionless blockchain and a proof of work consensus protocol. 
Block-reward: fixed amount of newly minted crypto -assets given to the miner that has added a 
new block to the chain as a reward for its activity. 
Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDC): a digital currency issued directly by the Central Bank 
which translates the characteristics of a fiat currency in the digital arena. CBDCs are not classified 
as crypto-assets.  
Consensus Protocol: set of rules dictating how a decentralized network establishes which 
information is valid and can be validly added to the common ledger. 
Crypto-assets (in this thesis): a token which functioning is rooted in a decentralized blockchain 
network. 
Crypto-asset Service Provider (CASP): service provider of the crypto-market which is included 
among the covered entities under the anti-money laundering regulation. 
Cypherpunks: political and philosophical movement formed in the early nineties in the San 
Francisco area around the figures of Timothy May, Eric Hughes, and John Gilmore. 
Custodian Wallet: service provider that safeguards the crypto -assets of the customer retaining 
access to its private key. 
 8 
Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAO): organization rooted in a bundle of smart 
contracts that operate autonomously only following the rules engraved in its code – meaning 
without any centralized human operator being able to control or influence its actions. 
Decentralized Finance (DeFi): decentralized autonomous organizations  that offer financial 
services (loan, investment, etc.). 
Distributed Ledger Technology: network rooted in a  distributed a shared ledger safeguarded 
by a number of nodes which cooperate in its maintenance and update. Blockchain constitutes a 
subset of DLTs as  a network where not only the access but also the control of the ledger is 
decentralized. 
Ethereum: Ethereum is a permissionless blockchain launched in 2014 by Vitalilk Buterin. 
Ethereum, which native crypto -asset is Ether, allows the computation of smart contracts which 
are then executed in a decentralized fashion. 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF):  independent Agency part of the OECD, based in Paris 
and founded in in 1989 by the G7. It is widely regarded as the international standard setter in the 
anti-money laundering field. It operates through Recommendations and mutual evaluation 
processes.  
Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU): national, independent agencies tasked with the supervision 
and implementation of the anti -money laundering regulation as well as with the reception and 
analysis of SARs. Depending on the national regime the FIU can be incardinated in different 
sections of the public administration (e.g., Central Bank, Law Enforcement Authority, Ministry of 
Justice).  
Hard fork: a permanent split in the blockchain that causes the coexistence of two parallel ledgers. 
Hash Function: a mathematical function that converts an input of arbitrary length into an output 
of a fixed length. 
Initial Coin Offering (ICO): funding instrument mainly used by crypto -related startups. It 
consists in the emission of a native crypto-assets, the buyers of the token are afforded certain pre-
 9 
established rights. Depending on the rights afforded to the token holders these can be assimilated 
to stocks or to bonds. 
Know Your Customer (KYC):  activity carried out by a covered entity to profile their customer 
in order to monitor their activities and spot suspicious one. 
Layer Two Solutions: implementation that are rooted in an underlying network not necessarily 
controlled and developed by the developers of the layer two solution. 
Mining: activity of solving complex mathematical problems, within the framework of the Proof 
of Work consensus protocol, to earn the right to add a new block to the blockchain  and receive 
the corresponding block-reward. The individuals/corporations performing such activity are called 
miners. 
Non-custodian wallet: service provider that safeguards the crypto-assets of the customer without 
retaining access to its private key. 
Non-fungible Token (NFT): a blockchain-based token computed to be unique. The unicity can 
be due to the connection of such token with a physical or digital object established through a smart 
contract. 
Oracle (blockchain): third party that acts as source of information for the functioning of a smart 
contract. When, to reach a decision, the smart contract has to act according to external 
information, the latter can be connected to an oracle that feeds them such information. An oracle 
can be any source of information from a human (as an arbiter or mediator) to a website (as a 
weather forecast or newspaper) 
Peer-to-peer: any type of technology that allows t wo or more parties to communicate and/or 
exchange values directly, meaning in the absence of an intermediary. 
Permissioned Blockchain: decentralized network which allows the establishment of a 
centralized centre of governance.  
Permissionless Blockchain: fully decentralized network where anyone can join and see the 
ledger without any restriction. 
 10 
Private key (Blockchain): the private key is an alphanumeric string that enables to send the 
crypto-assets associated with an account. It can be likened to a password. 
Proof of Work: type of consensus protocol used in Bitcoin. 
Public key: alphanumeric string derived, through hashing, from the private key. It is used to 
compute, through a second layer of hashing, the crypto-asset address, in turn, used to identify the 
account on the blockchain. 
Self-hosted wallet: crypto-asset address not managed by any crypto-asset service provider, hence, 
only controlled by the owner of the connected private key. 
Smart contracts (blockchain): self-executing software running on a blockchain network. 
Suspicious Activity Report (SAR): report filed by the covered entity to the Financial Intelligence 
Unit when a suspicious activity is identified. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 
Introduction 
 
 
The expression “follow the money” articulates one of the cardinal strategies of modern policing. 
This strategy views the monitoring and analysis of money and value flows as a key tool in the 
prevention, investigation, and repression of crime. Within this perspective, the identification and 
forfeiture of illicit proceeds are primary tool s for police forces. To this end, not only law 
enforcement authorities but also a growing array of private institutions are called to take an active 
role in the fight against “criminal money”. Eminently, the lemma “follow the money” is 
implemented through a two -pronged approach. The classic investigative, reactive approach is 
coupled with a preventive strategy based on the analysis of financial data aimed at spotting 
suspicious transactions. This second prong engages private instituti ons in an active search for 
suspicious activ ities to then be reported to investigators. Administrative law – on which the 
preventive duties are based on – blends with criminal law to create a holistic approach to the fight 
against illicitly sourced money. 
Two fundamental macrotrends underly this policing strategy, one ideological and one architectural.   
First, the emergence of an economistic approach to criminal justice. Ideologically rooted in the 
rational-choice theory and in a capitalistic view of the individual as homo economicus, this approach 
sees economic incentives as key to the criminal rationale. By hindering the ability of the perpetrator 
to enjoy the proceeds of their crimes, the policy-maker aims at reducing the rationality of criminal 
activity.1 In a pervasively capitalistic society money is the key metric for the evaluation of success, 
 
1 This vision of the criminal and connected goal is clearly stated by the US Treasury Department’s Financial 
Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) “With few exceptions, criminals are motivated by one thing - profit. Greed 
drives the criminal, and the end result is that illegally -gained money must be introduced into the nation's legitimate financial 
systems”, see FinCEN, What is Money Laundering?, FinCEN website, https://www.fincen.gov/what-money-
laundering; on a similar note see J. Cassara, Money laundering and illicit financial flows, 2020, 1, “criminals, criminal 
organizations, kleptocrats and some businesses and corporations are typically motivated by greed (…) the criminal themselves, 
common sense, and criminal science all tell us that the aim of these activities is not crime itself – but the proceeds of crime”; V. 
Manes, Il riciclaggio dei proventi illeciti: teoria e prassi dell’intervento penale, in Rivista Trimestrale di Diritto Penale 
dell’economia, 2004, 1, “Il riciclaggio è un nodo essenziale, strategico, nell’approccio al tema della criminalità organizzata. E 
ciò perché, in genere, la forza motrice di ogni associazione criminale è il profitto”.  
 13 
criminals are seen as no different. Within this perspective, striking the ir economic proceeds is 
perceived as hitting where it hurts the most. Furthermore, the identification of illicit money flows 
is seen as a crucial first step in the detection of the underlying criminal activity. Law enforcement 
authorities can use financial data to uncover illicit endeavours and piece together criminal 
networks. 
Second, globalization and digitalization have pushed markets towards centralized, macro-
organizations. Particularly, digital environments and financial markets, due to network effects, are 
mostly oligopolies with few entities controlling the lion’s share of the market. This conformation 
of the market has led to an increasing reliance on these entities by the policymaker.  Policing is 
increasingly delegated by the State to private enterprises which are tasked with the protection of a 
diverse array of interests through risk-based models – so-called compliance regulation.2 Examples 
of such a policy trend are, at the European level, the Network Infrastructure Security Directive 
(NIS), the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), and the Digital Services Act (DSA). 
A key product of this strategy is the anti -money laundering regulation. Emerged in the United 
States during the second decade of the twentieth century, anti -money laundering has become 
central for modern criminal policing.3 Its core objective is preventing criminals from integrating 
the proceeds of their illicit activity in to the licit market.4 To this end, the anti -money laundering 
regulation introduces a decentralized alarm system , through the regulation of the intermediaries 
that control the value exchange infrastructure – such as banks, insurances companies, investment 
funds. The aim is to detect, investigate, and freeze funds of illicit origin.  
Within this policy framework, the present analysis will explore how the legislator has responded 
to the introduction of blockchain technology and crypto -assets. As we will detail, blockchain 
introduces a new architecture for digital exchanges of value. One that substitutes the central 
intermediary with a decentralized network of cooperating nodes. By reshaping the architecture of 
digital exchange systems, blockchain undermines the fundamental premise underlyin g the  
 
2 See A. Gullo, Compliance, in Archivio Penale, 1, 2023, 1. 
3 V. Manes, Il riciclaggio dei proventi illeciti: teoria e prassi dell’intervento penale, cit., 2. 
4 For the connection between money laundering prevention and rational choice theory, N. Gilmour, 
Understanding the practices behind money laundering –A rational choice interpretation,  in International Journal of Law, 
Crime and Justice, 44, 2016. 
 
 14 
preventive prong of the  anti-money laundering policy strategy: the necessary intermediation of 
digital exchanges of value.  
The primary aim of the present research is to critically examine the impact of crypto -assets and 
blockchain on the financial monitoring infrastructure and the connected policy responses. Due to 
the disruptive nature of blockchain’s transaction model, this is a field that has known a great degree 
of innovation, particularly in Europe. The present decade will be fundamental in the definition of 
a European policy strategy for crypto -assets. The introduction of the Market in Crypto -asset 
Regulation (MiCaR) – the first comprehensive regulation of crypto -assets worldwide – and the 
upcoming Anti-money Laundering Package will shape how the Union approaches crypto -assets 
and its ability to reap their benefits while mitigating the risks. 
However, the present research also has a second, larger, purpose. Digitalization is altering the 
physiognomy of the world and human action. Rules that have been regarded as essential to human 
existence for centuries are now called into question. For instance, digital interaction systems allow 
continuous non -local exchanges  freeing humans from their corporeal boundaries , artificial 
intelligence promises to create non -human autonomous decision makers. Within this changing 
architecture, the validity of legal tenets developed across eras is challenged forcing the legislator to 
reimagine its strategies in an unprecedented fashion. Taking anti-money laundering as a case study, 
the blockchain, by introducing the possibility to exchange value digitally in the absence of an 
intermediary, challenges the previous intermediary-based legislative strategy.5 The text will analyse 
how, and if, the policy maker has adapted to this new playing field. The perspective of the text is 
that a simple reiteration of pre -existing models is not adequate in the presence of fundamental 
architectural modifications. The legislator cannot simply stick to an “everything changes, nothing 
changes” approach. Rather, it should proactively engage with such architectures and imagine new 
solutions rooted in them. The ability to reinvent its strategy, and even its fundamental tenets, is 
key for the law to survive in a world that is changing in such a profound manner.  
It is with this double perspective that we invite the reader to approach the present analysis.  
 
5 A. Minto, The legal characterization of crypto-exchange platforms, in Global Jurist, 22/1, 2021, 150 -151, “In general 
terms, the absence of centralised intermediaries who carry out transactions on behalf of customers has led to a lack of transparency 
in the management of the financial system, which significantly hinders the implementation of traditional anti-money laundering 
measures”. 
 15 
Before commenc ing the analysis, it is  necessary to delineate the playing field and define the 
fundamental elements of the anti-money laundering legislation. The present text will focus solely 
on the preventive prong of money laundering. The legislation analysed is the one aimed at creating 
the abovementioned decentralized alarm system through the regulation of intermediaries. 
Therefore, key to our analysis will be which intermediaries the policymaker has identified within 
the crypto-market as covered entiti es and how compliance duties have been extended to them. 
The repressive prong of anti -money laundering is, hence, out of our scope. Section one of the 
present chapter provides for a  normative and criminological definition of money laundering. 
Section two details the historical development of the money laundering regulation. Section three 
presents the structure of the text. Section four details the methodology. 
 
1. Understanding money laundering 
 
Money laundering can be defined as a crime consisting in one or more actions  carried out by an 
individual or a group to disguise the illicit origin of the proceeds of a crime.6  
 
6 At a supranational level several definitions have been provided. The most relevant for our ends are the 
ones provided by the Palermo Convention – United Nations, United Nations Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime and the Protocols Thereto, 15 November 2000, which is directly referenced as legal basis by the 
Financial Action Task Force in its Forty Recommendations - Financial Action Task Force, International 
standards on combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism & proliferation. The FATF Recommendations, 
Paris, 2012, 12 – and by the European Directive on combating money laundering through criminal law of 
2018 - Directive of the European Union, 23 rd October 2018, n. 1673. The Palermo Convention defines 
money laundering at article 6 “The conversion or transfer of property, knowing that such property is the proceeds of crime, 
for the purpose of concealing or disguising the illicit origin of the property or of helping any person who is involved in th e 
commission of the predicate offence to e vade the legal consequences of his or her action ”; the European Directive on 
combating money laundering through criminal law identifies, at article 3, three possible conducts that can 
integrate a money laundering offence “(a) the conversion or transfer of property, knowing that such property is derived 
from criminal activity, for the purpose of concealing or disguising the illicit origin of the property or of assisting any person who 
is involved in the commission of such a n activity to evade the legal consequences of that person’s action; (b) the concealment or 
disguise of the true nature, source, location, disposition, movement, rights with respect to, or ownership of, property, know ing 
that such property is derived from c riminal activity; (c) the acquisition, possession or use of property, knowing at the time of 
receipt, that such property was derived from criminal activity”; see also the definition by B. Villányi, Money laundering: 
History, regulations, and techniques , in Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Criminology and Criminal Justice , 2021, 1, 
“Money laundering is the conversion of criminal incomes into assets that cannot be traced back to the underlying crime”, in a 
similar sense P. Van Duyne – J. H. Harvey – L. Y. Gelemerova, The critical handbook of money laundering: Policy, 
analysis and myths, Springer, 2018, 94. 
 16 
A first distinguishing feature of money laundering is its connection with the purpose pursued by 
the agent. When it comes to this crime, t he conduct is usually solely defined in general terms.   
Rather, what matters is the intention and the effect of the conduct: the obfuscation of the illicit 
origin of the goods being laundered. 7 Money laundering is, therefore, an event-based rather than 
an activity-based crime. This is mainly due to its multifaced nature. The pathways of laundering 
are multiple and continuously changing, providing a stable , detailed definition would risk forcing 
the legislator to continuously play catch with the criminals. Furthermore, the damaging core of the 
offence is in the event not the actions. Money laundering is usually carried out through perfectly 
legal activities – as wire transfers, real estate investments, art trading, etc. The societal harm is not 
caused by the activities but by th eir effect: the integration of illicit capitals into the licit market. 
This characteristic of money laundering also poses a fundamental challenge to its detection. Taken 
singularly money laundering conducts are perfectly legal and mostly indistinguishable from normal 
commercial transactions. It is only when seen holistically and teleologically that their criminal 
nature emerges.8  
A second element characteristic of money laundering is its necessary connection with a previous 
crime. The structure of money laundering requires the presence of a predicate offence  which has 
generated an economic proceed. The connection between the two crimes needs only to be  
objective – as the laundering activity has to concern the proceeds of a predicate offence – and not 
subjective – meaning the individual/s committing the predicate offence do/es not have to be the 
same laundering the proceeds.9 Furthermore, the money laundering offence does not have to be 
 
7 A. Gullo, Autoriciclaggio e reati tributari, in Diritto Penale Contemporaneo, 2018, 10, “ il riciclaggio, e ancor di pi ù 
l’autoriciclaggio, si fondano sul pilastro dell’ostacolo all’identificazione della provenienza delittuosa”. 
8 V. Manes, Il riciclaggio dei proventi illeciti: teoria e prassi dell’intervento penale, in Rivista Trimestrale di Diritto Penale 
dell’economia, 2004, 2.  
9 The punishability of self -laundering – meaning money laundering activity pursued by the same 
individual/s who committed the predicate offence – has long constituted a debated issue. In some 
jurisdiction such punishability was seen as a duplication of the punishment as the perpetrator was 
simultaneously punished for the predicate offence and for using the proceeds of such offence. In this sense, 
the Palermo convention allowed at article 6, para. 2, lett. e), “if required by fundamental principles of the domestic 
law of a State Party, it may be provided that the offences set forth in paragraph 1 of this article do not apply to the perso ns 
who committed the predicate offence ”, see in this sense P. Van Duyne – J. H. Harvey – L. Y. Gelemerova,  The 
critical handbook of money laundering: Policy, analysis and myths , cit., 109. The European Directive of 2018 has, 
however, taken a different stance by clarifying – at art. 3, para. 5 – that “Member States shall take the necessary 
measures to ensure that the conduct referred to in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 1 is punishable as a criminal offence when  
committed by persons who committed, or were involved in, the criminal activity from which the property was derived”. Due to 
this initial reluctance, certain Member States distinguish money laundering and self-laundering, an example 
being Italy which provides for a money laundering offence –art. 648 bis c.p. – and a self-laundering one – 
art. 648 ter 1 c.p. – the latter under stricter limits and with a milder punishment , see C. Piergallini, 
Autoriciclaggio, concorso di persone e responsabilità dell’ente, in Criminalia, 2015.  
 17 
necessarily perpetrated in the same jurisdiction as the predicate offence.  The only requirement 
being that the predicate offence is a crime in both jurisdictions.10  
With specific regards to the predicate offence there are two fundamental questions that are key to 
money laundering policing. First, what type of crimes can constitute a predicate offence.11 Second, 
what is the connection that needs to exist between the predicate offence and the money laundering 
one. At the European level , the Directive on Combating Money Laundering through Criminal 
Law12 has responded to both questions establishing a minimum common standard  within the 
Union.  
Regarding the first question, the Directive , at article 2, provides for two alternative criteria: a 
quantitative one, a predicate offence is any offence that is punished with a “deprivation of liberty or a 
detention order for a maximum of more than one year or, as regards Member States that have a minimum threshold 
for offences in their legal systems, any offence punishable by deprivation of liberty or a detention order for a minimum 
of more than six months ”; a qualitative one consisting in a list of crimes that are always predicate 
offences irrespective of their punishment. 
Regarding the second question, the Directive clarifies that the connection between predicate 
offence and money laundering is a weak one. This means there is no need for the predicate offence 
to be fully ascertained or even for its perpetrators to be identified. As stated by article 3, paragraph 
3, letter b), of the Directive “a conviction for the offences referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 is possible where it 
is established that the property was derived from a criminal activity, without it being necessary t o establish all the 
factual elements or all circumstances relating to that criminal activity, including the identity of the perpetrator”. 
Finally, regarding object and mens rea . The object of money laundering can be any property. 
Meaning that any proceeds of a crime with economic significance – a car, fine art, a bond, etc. – 
can be laundered.13 Concerning the mens rea, money laundering is a crime of intent. Particularly, the 
intent has to encompass not only the laundering activities but also the illicit origin of the proceeds 
 
10 As clarified by the Directive at art. 3, para. 3, lett. c., and the Palermo Convention at art. 6, para. 2, lett. 
c. 
11 P. Van Duyne – J. H. Harvey – L. Y. Gelemerova, The critical handbook of money laundering: Policy, analysis 
and myths, cit., 109-110. 
12 Directive of the European Union, no. 1673, 23rd October 2018. 
13 The Directive defines property at art. 2, para. 2, as “assets of any kind, whether corporeal or incorporeal, movable 
or immovable, tangible or intangible, and legal documents or instruments in any form, including electronic or digital, evidencing 
title to, or an interest in, such assets”. 
 18 
being laundered. This second element is of specific importance as the activities conducted to 
launder are usually legitimate. It is, hence, the knowledge of the provenance of the objects of such 
activities where the discrimen between licit and illicit is traced. 
 
1.1 The criminology of money laundering. Layering, placement, 
and integration 
 
In the previous  section we have described the normative definition of money laundering, the 
present section will delve into its criminological conformation. 
As most criminal activity, money laundering can be pursued at different levels of complexity, from 
a mere series of wire transfers to multinational schemes of great intricacy. 14 Irrespective of the 
level of sophistication used, laundering is traditionally reconstructed by the literature 15 in three 
fundamental steps: placement, layering, and integration. 16 Through these three steps the 
provenance of a property is transformed from illicit to licit. To understand these three steps, we 
have to keep in mind the purpose of money laundering.  
The final goal of money laundering is twofold . On the one hand, grant the perpetrator of the 
predicate offence the possibility to freely use such property in the licit market so to enjoy the fruits 
of its crimes. On the other hand, avoid ing the criminal is connected with the predicate offen ce, 
thus, covering the financial trail of the crime itself. 17  
 
14 B. Villányi, Money laundering: History, regulations, and techniques, cit., 3. 
15 O. Tucker,  The flow of illicit funds. A case study approach to anti -money laundering compliance, Georgetown 
University Press, 2022, 12; J. Cassara, Money laundering and illicit financial flows, cit., 28; N. Gilmour, 
Understanding the practices behind money laundering –A rational choice interpretation, cit., 2; V. Manes, Il riciclaggio dei 
proventi illeciti: teoria e prassi dell’intervento penale, cit., 3. 
16 These steps are explicitly mentioned by the US FinCEN, in FinCEN, History of Anti -Money Laundering 
Laws, FinCEN Website, https://www.fincen.gov/history-anti-money-laundering-laws as well as by the 
UNODC, se United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Money Laundering, 
https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/money-laundering/overview.html; B. Villányi, Money laundering: History, 
regulations, and techniques, cit., 4. 
17 O. Tucker,  The flow of illicit funds. A case study approach to anti -money laundering compliance, Georgetown 
University Press, 2022, 13. 
 19 
Let’s then analyse the three phases of money laundering. 
The first phase is placement. Placement consists in the introduction of the illicitly sourced property 
in the licit market. In order to commence the laundering activities, the criminal has to first 
reintroduce the property into the licit market. This first phase is the most delicate as the link 
between the predicate offence and the property is still strong. 18 The launderer has to use a series 
of stratagems to avoid the placement of the property raises suspicions and triggers an investigation. 
For instance, the perpetrator may smuggle cash in jurisdictions where anti -money laundering 
controls are scarce or divide the proceeds in smaller sums which are then deposited in multiple 
accounts (so-called smurfing).19 Furthermore, the perpetrator usually tries to distance this activity 
from its identity. To this end, launderers may use dummy corporations, money mules, etc. to shield 
the identity of the real beneficiary.  
The second phase is layering. Through layering the launderer aims at introducing as many layers 
as possible between the property and the predicate crime. The final aim is to introduce so many 
layers that retracing the origin of the good is impossible or, at least, exceedingly complex. During 
this phase, the property is moved across different accounts, jurisdictions and/or transformed ( in 
bitcoin, a foreign currency, fine art, or real estate). Also during this phase, criminals employ tactics 
to distance the property from the real owner to disguise their ownership and give the perception 
the money is moving across different accounts and/or legal/natural persons. 
The third phase is integration. Integration completes the laundering cycle as the property is 
introduced in the licit market and can be freely used by the perpetrator. This phase may consist, 
for example, in the sale of a property the launderer has acquired as part of the layering phase. At 
this point, if money laundering has been done correctly, it should be nearly impossible to hint the 
illicit source of the funds. At this stage, it may, hence, be already too late to identify criminal activity 
and apprehend the criminal.  
While this triphasic description of money laundering is a simplification of the laundering process 
it is still useful to understand money laundering. Many times, the phases are intertwined or may be 
skipped completely. However, the triphasic distinction is useful to comprehend the fundamental 
 
18 J. Cassara, Money laundering and illicit financial flows, cit., 29. 
19 B. Villányi, Money laundering: History, regulations, and techniques, cit., 4. 
 20 
elements of the laundering cycle: the property has to be introduced in the licit market while 
disguising its source with the final purpose of integrating it and using it.  
 
2. A brief history of the anti-money laundering regulation 
 
Notwithstanding its key importance for modern policing, money laundering is a relatively recent 
policy field. The idea that financial data can be used to identify and prosecute criminals, especially 
in large, organized crime cases, is not new. 20 However, it is only recently that a comprehensive , 
internationally agreed,  strategy for curbing the use of the financial market by criminals was 
devised.21 Furthermore, the modern anti -money laundering regulation has, for the first time , 
envisioned a system to use financial data pre -emptively and not solely reactively (i.e., in the 
investigation phase) through the cooperation of the intermediaries that manage such data.  
The push for such a strategy originated in the United States within the framework of the war on 
drugs.22 Money laundering was, therefore, initially conceived as an instrument specifically designed 
to hinder the ability of narco -bosses worldwide to reinvest the proceeds deriving from the drug 
trade. As time passed the scope of money laundering widened and the legislation morphed into a 
multipurpose instrument to curb illicit finance.23 This enlargement process has followed two main 
avenues: first, a wider list of predicate offences  going beyond drug-related crimes; second, the 
inclusion of an increasing number of intermediaries among the covered entities. 
Let’s then retrace the fundamental steps of this legislative path. 
 
20 Famously Al Capone, the Chicago Mobster was finally convicted on tax evasion counts, see New York 
Times, Al Capone guilty of tax evasion, 17th October 1931, 
https://archive.nytimes.com/learning.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/10/17/oct-17-1931-al-capone-guilty-of-
tax-evasion/, W. Muller, Anti-money laundering–a short history, in W. Muller – C. H. K ̈alin – J. G. Goldsworth 
(eds.) Anti-Money laundering: International law and practice, Wiley, 2007, 3. 
21 A. dell’Osso, Riciclaggio di proventi illeciti e sistema penale, Giappichelli, 2017, 5. 
22 B. Villányi, Money laundering: History, regulations, and techniques, cit., 9; A. dell’Osso, Riciclaggio di proventi illeciti 
e sistema penale, cit., 7. 
23 A. Gullo, Autoriciclaggio e reati tributari, cit., 2-3. 
 21 
The beginning of the money laundering legislative saga is traditionally seen as the Bank Secrecy 
Act (BSA) enforced in the U nited States in 1970. 24 The Act introduced recordkeeping and 
reporting obligations for US banks and financial institutions. The infrastructure was further 
strengthened through the introduction in 1986 of the Money Laundering Control Act 25 and in 
1990 of the Financial Crime Enforcement Agency (FinCEN). The creation of the FinCEN, a 
central agency with the mandate of receiving and analysing suspicious activity reports as well as 
coordinating anti -money laundering efforts, is of particular relevance. Eminently, the idea of a 
central, independent agency solely devoted to anti -money laundering has remained key in anti -
money laundering regulation and has penetrated worldwide with the progressive establishment of 
National Financial Intelligence Units (FIU). 
Starting from the 1980s, the focus on financial integrity increasingly crossed the U nited States’ 
borders and became central in global supervision efforts. This culminated in a call for action by 
the Group of Seven in July 1989 at the Paris Summit.26 There, within the context of curbing drug 
trafficking, the call for action determined to:  
“Convene a financial action task force from Summit participants and other countries interested in these problems. 
Its mandate is to assess the results of cooperation already undertaken in order to prevent the utilization of the 
banking system and financial institutions for the purpose of money laundering, and to consider additional 
preventive efforts in this field, including the adaptation of the legal and regulatory systems so as to enhance 
multilateral judicial assistance. The first meeting of this task force will be called by France and its report will be 
completed by April 1990”.27 
 
24 FINCEN, History of Anti -Money Laundering Laws , https://www.fincen.gov/history-anti-money-
laundering-laws; P. Van Duyne – J. H. Harvey – L. Y. Gelemerova, The critical handbook of money laundering: 
Policy, analysis and myths, cit., 4; 43. 
25 P. Van Duyne – J. H. Harvey – L. Y. Gelemerova, The critical handbook of money laundering: Policy, analysis 
and myths, cit., 50 as well as M. Bergström, The Global AML Regime and the EU AML Directives: Prevention and 
Control, in C. King – C. Walker – J. Gurulé (Eds.), The Palgrave handbook of criminal and terrorism financing law , 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2018, 34. 
identify this act as the first real anti -money laundering legislation as the BSA was mainly focused on tax 
evasion. 
26 P. Van Duyne – J. H. Harvey – L. Y. Gelemerova, The critical handbook of money laundering: Policy, analysis 
and myths, cit., 3.  
27 G7/8 Summits, Economic Declaration, Paris, 16 th July 1989, 
http://www.g8.utoronto.ca/summit/1989paris/communique/index.html  
 22 
This declaration laid the ground for the establishment of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 
which would become the key international policymaker in the field. 28 Just one year later, in 1990, 
the FATF published a report containing forty recommendation s to address money laundering. 29 
FATF's establishment and issuance of the Forty Recommendations solidified the role of financial 
institutions in anti-money laundering systems. Particularly, recommendation four emphasized the 
compatibility of financial institution secrecy laws with FATF's guidelines, similarly, 
recommendation five compelled financial intermediaries to perform customer due diligence 
controls and barred anonymous accounts.  To reinforce the implementation of the 
recommendations, the FATF established a list of non-cooperative jurisdictions – so-called blacklist 
– where noncomplying states would be recorded.30  
At the same time, the United Nations  (UN) started working on the criminalization of money 
laundering. The foundation for criminalizing money laundering across jurisdictions can be traced 
back to the UN Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, 
of 1988 .31 The scope was extended beyond drug trafficking through the United Nations 
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 32 (the Palermo Convention). The Palermo 
Convention extended, at article 6, predicate offences to a list of serious crime s and reiterated, at 
article 7, the relevance of financial institutions in the prevention of money laundering. The latter 
article urged states to establish comprehensive domestic regulations for banks, non-bank financial 
institutions, and susceptible bodies to deter and detect money laundering, emphasizing customer 
identification, record-keeping, and reporting of suspicious transactions. The Convention marked 
a turning point as states recognized the necessity to limit bank secrecy in criminal cases in order to 
ensure the integrity of the banking systems. International agreements like the UN Convention 
 
28 M. Bergström, The Global AML Regime and the EU AML Directives: Prevention and Control,  cit., 36 ; A. 
dell’Osso, Riciclaggio di proventi illeciti e sistema penale, cit., 13 – 14. 
29 Financial Action Task Force, The forty recommendation of the financial action task force on money laundering, Paris, 
1990; for an analysis of the content of such recommendations and their structure see chapter 3, section 1. 
30 W. Muller, Anti-money laundering–a short history, cit., 6; B. Villányi, Money laundering: History, regulations, and 
techniques, cit., 10; M. Bergström, The Global AML Regime and the EU AML Directives: Prevention and Control, 
cit., 36. 
31 United Nations, UN Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, Vienna, 1988; 
on the origins of this Convention see P. Van Duyne – J. H. Harvey – L. Y. Gelemerova, The critical handbook 
of money laundering: Policy, analysis and myths , cit., 53 ; V. Manes, Il riciclaggio dei proventi illeciti: teoria e prassi 
dell’intervento penale, cit., 7. 
32 United Nations, United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols Thereto, 15 
November 2000; M. Bergström, The Global AML Regime and the EU AML Directives: Prevention and Control, 
cit., 35. 
 23 
Against Corruption (UNCAC), 33 the Strasbourg Convention, 34 and the OECD Convention on 
Combating Bribery35 further paved the way for agreements and mechanisms safeguarding financial 
integrity and supervision. 
The international strengthening of the anti -money laundering framework has steadily continued 
since then. The FATF now counts thirty -nine members and two-hundred-fifteen countries have 
adhered to its recommendations. 36 Furthermore, a series of regional FATF -style bodies have 
flourished across the world. 37 At the same time, the scope of the FATF’s mandate has been 
extended to terrorism financing, following the 2001  terrorist attacks. The extension has been 
followed by the draft of eight special recommendations  devoted to  terrorism financing .38 The 
FATF has continuously revised its recommendations with the last general update being conducted 
in 2012, when the latest version of the Forty Recommendations was published.39  
At the European level, the Union has played a key role in the adaptation process to the anti-money 
laundering standards. Starting from 1991, the Union has passed five anti -money laundering 
Directives – the last one approved in 2018.40 The aim is to strengthen the integrity of the Union’s 
financial system while ensuring a level playing field across the common market. As we will further 
detail in chapter three, part one, section three-three, the Union’s anti-money laundering framework 
is currently undergoing a fundamental upheaval. Following a series of scandals, the Commission 
has laid out a plan to further centralize the regulation and supervision of the anti-money laundering 
regulation. The pla n consists in the substitution of the current Directives with a Regulation and 
the creation of a European Anti-money Laundering Authority (AMLA).41 
 
 
33 United Nations, United Nations Convention against Corruption, 31st October 2003. 
34 Council of Europe, Criminal Law Convention on Corruption, 27th January 1999. 
35 OECD, Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions , 17 th 
December 1997. 
36 For a complete list see https://www.fatf-gafi.org/en/countries.html  
37 See, for instance, for Latin America the GAFILAT (https://www.gafilat.org/index.php/es/) or for West 
Africa the GIABA (https://www.giaba.org/); P. Van Duyne – J. H. Harvey – L. Y. Gelemerova, The critical 
handbook of money laundering: Policy, analysis and myths, cit., 57. 
38 Financial Action Task Force, FATF IX Special Recommendations, Paris, 2001. 
39 Financial Action Task Force, International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the Finance of Terrorism 
and Proliferation. The FATF Recommendations, cit. 
40 M. Bergström, The Global AML Regime and the EU AML Directives: Prevention and Control, cit., 35. 
41 For a further analysis of this plan and of the connected Package see Chapter 2, Part 2, Section 3.3.1. 
 24 
3. Structure 
 
Now that we have laid out the groundwork, let’s delve into the structure of the present  research. 
The thesis is divided into five chapters, followed by concluding remarks. 
Chapter one outlines the historical and ideological background of blockchain and crypto-assets. It 
delves into the history of the movement that first conceived crypto-assets and their ideological 
motivations. It also examines how crypto-assets and blockchain have evolved since their inception 
in 2008. The aim is two -fold. First, underline how crypto -assets are not merely a technological 
innovation. Rather, they are technological means to a political end which strikes at the heart of the 
financial monitoring infrastructure. Second, analyse how the market has hinged on such ideological 
premises and influenced blockchain’s growth. Blockchain and crypto -assets are not a monolith, 
but rather a multifaced market where competing views and technologies coexist. Understanding 
such nuances is key for the policymaker as each implementation poses partially different risks and 
opportunities. 
Chapter two details the technological functioning of blockchain . The aim is to provide a 
technological, layman background to the reader. The underlying idea is that to regulate a certain 
technology it is first necessary to clearly understand its functioning. The aim of the chapter is not 
to turn legal scholars into computer scientists. Rather, to detail the logic behind blockchain 
technology and its fundamental components so to provide policymakers with the tools needed to 
act on such logic and adapt their strategies.  
Chapter three critically analyses the definition of crypto-assets and crypto-asset service providers 
as stipulated by the anti -money laundering regulation.  Given our scop e, we will focus on two 
legislative sources: the Financial Action Task Force – as the body providing the overarching money 
laundering framework - and the European Union – as the key source of our analysis. The chapter 
is composed of an introduction and three parts. The introduction builds on chapter s 1 and 2 
highlighting how blockchain’s tr ansaction model intersects with the anti -money laundering 
infrastructure. It examines the pain points generated by blockchain as well as the emerging 
opportunities. Part 1 focuses on the definition of crypto -assets to critically examine the policy 
choices made so far. We conclude with a proposal for a different definition of crypto -assets 
 25 
customized to anti-money laundering. Part 2 focuses on crypto-asset service providers. It analyses 
which service providers  operating in the crypto -market have been chosen by the regulator as 
covered entities, also taking a historical perspective. It concludes with a critical assessment of such 
choices and a proposal for a different approach to intermediaries’ regulation.  Part 3 summarizes 
the findings of the chapter and proposes possible avenues for further development.  
Chapter four delves into the content of the anti-money laundering duties. After a brief introduction 
of the overarching duties, it focuses on how these have been customized to crypto-assets. To this 
end, it considers both primary and secondary sources with a special focus on the European 
Banking Authority (EBA). It underlines the complexities connected with the extension of a policy 
framework thought for a centralized, intermediated market to an, at least partially, decentralized 
and disintermediated one.  
Chapter five focuses on one category that has generated an acute debate in the policy  arena: 
Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs). The governance model of these organizations 
presents a distinct challenge to policy maker s due to their headless, code -based functioning. 
Furthermore, DAOs epitomize the fundamental hurdles posed by blockchain to regulators: the 
absence of a centralized point of pressure and the creation of horizontal headless networks of 
cooperating parties. The chapter examines how the policymaker has responded so far, as well as 
the policy proposals that have been advanced. It concludes with a series of proposals to reimagine 
the policy approach and customize it to such organizations.  
The text is closed with a series of concluding remarks. As the policy proposals are already advanced 
at the end of each chapter, the conclusion summarizes our findings and concisely presents the 
results of the research.  
 
4. Methodology 
 
As detailed above, the present text will investigate one primary research question: how has the 
European anti-money laundering legislature responded to the advent of crypto-assets? This overall 
descriptive interrogative is complemented by the following critical sub -question: is the European 
 26 
approach to crypto-assets’ regulation a mere reiteration of the previous anti -money laundering 
strategy or does it follow new avenues? This question required in turn the analysis of one further 
interrogative: how can the intermediary-centred strategy for anti-money laundering be adapted to 
a decentralized, disintermediated architecture so to guarantee the effectiveness of controls while 
ensuring legal certainty?  
This primary research question is complemented by a second one with a larger scope: how has the 
legislature responded to an architectural modification in the structure of financial transactions – 
i.e., their disintermediation – which undermines its former policy strategy?  Which is in turn 
complemented by the following sub -questions: has the response to the analysed architectural 
modification been conservative42 or innovative43? Is the chosen approach enough to confront the 
risks to the effectiveness of controls posed by a paradigm-shifting technology? 
To answer these interrogatives, the research has developed in subsequent steps.  
First, an analysis of the historical and philosophical movement underlying blockchain’s 
development and Bitcoin’s launch in 2009. Rather than an isolated event, blockchain’s introduction 
is better understood as a historical process stretching across over fifty years. The community 
working on blockchain had clear political and social purposes that strike at the heart of the financial 
monitoring infrastructure. To fully understand the legal conundrum generated by crypto -assets it 
is significant to appreciate such aims as they have influenced the conformation of the resulting 
technology. Eminently, as underlined by the historical analysis, the development of crypto -assets 
is intimately connected with a quest for financial privacy and autonomy from centralized trust -
brokers – i.e., States, Central Banks, and Financial Institutions. In this sense, the political objectives 
that shaped the design of crypto -assets are directly related to the policy strategy underlying the 
financial monitoring infrastructure. Truly, o ne of the fundamental objectives of the community 
developing crypto -assets was to allow individuals to avoid such an infrastructure. It is, hence, 
crucial to understand how developers tried to achieve this goal to comprehend the risks crypto -
assets pose to financial monitoring. Furthermore, the evolution of the crypto -market post-2009 
details the hurdles connected with the new decentralized and disintermediated governanc e 
 
42 With conservative it is meant a policy approach that reiterates the pre-existing strategy to market 
regulation – in the case of money laundering, mainly the regulation of intermediaries. 
43 With innovative it is meant a policy approach that introduces a complementary or radically different 
strategy to market regulation. 
 27 
infrastructure envisioned by blockchain’s developers which hinders anti-money laundering efforts. 
This evolution, and the connected “tales of decentralization” analysed in chapter one, underline 
the concrete weaknesses of such a model. Such weaknesses constitute potential points of entry for 
the policy maker as well as emerging risks the latter has to address and mitigate. 
This part was mainly carried out through desk research. The desk research has gone beyond pure 
legal texts. Historical books, manifestos of the members of the early blockchain community, public 
statements, and newspaper articles have been analysed. The aim was to achieve a complete 
understanding of the movement , which, given its fluid and bottom -up nature, could only be 
acquired through a variety of sources. Furthermore, in the early stages of the research, a series of 
informal interviews with members of th e community – developers and forensics experts - have 
been carried out. These interviews were conducted informally, solely in order to get a better 
understanding of the technological issues relevant to the topic.  
Second, an analysis of the technology underlying crypto -assets. To regulate a technology the first 
step is truly comprehending its functioning. In this sense, the functioning of blockchain has been 
analysed both holistically and in its components - consensus protocols, asymmetric cryptography, 
etc. Furthermore, the whole spectrum of blockchain infrastructures has been examined. 
Eminently, blockchain, rather than a monolith, is better understood as a  spectrum of solutions 
spanning from fully decentralized to  centralized networks . In this sense, such different 
infrastructures have been examined with a focus on the impact of each implementation on the 
governance structure. Following the examination of the infrastructure, the analysis has moved to 
the analysis of the superstructure  – meaning the technological solutions that exploit blockchain 
networks to build organizations and software . This has entailed the study of blockchain-based 
implementations such  as smart contracts, decentrali sed autonomous organization s, and non -
fungible tokens.  
This part has been carried out through desk research. The desk research has mainly entailed the 
analysis of computer science papers, not only blockchain -specific but also from neighbouring 
fields, such as cryptography. Furthermore, the researcher has follo wed specialized courses and 
used blockchain and connected tools – blockchain analytics software, hashing algorithms, etc. – 
to gain a first-hand understanding of the technological infrastructure.  
 28 
Third, problem statement. After having acquired a complete understanding of the technology and 
its historical background, the research has  delved into its connection with financial flow 
monitoring and anti-money laundering regulation. The aim was to identify the unique risks posed 
to the pre-existing anti-money laundering policy strategy so as to formulate accurate policy-specific 
research questions. In this sense, th e implications of financial flows disintermediation and 
governance decentralization have be en analysed considering the present anti -money laundering 
strategy. To garner a better understanding of the problem, real-world cases of crypto -related 
criminality have been examined. These cases have been used as a testing ground for the risks 
identified. Eminently, by understanding how criminals concretely exploited crypto -assets to 
circumvent existing controls , it was possible to test the accuracy of the identified abstract 
risks. These cases have been used in the analysis to provide the reader with a co ncrete depiction 
of the risks identified so to facilitate understanding – i.e., Silk Road, Liberty Reserve, the DAO 
hack, and ransomware attacks.  
This part has been carried out through desk research. The research has prevalently focused on 
legal academic texts and reports of national and internal organizations (International Monetary 
Fund, Europol, OECD, etc.). However, the literature review has bee n complemented with the 
analysis of crypto-related criminal cases through the examination of National judgments, Financial 
Action Task Forces’ case reports, and publicly available interviews of individuals involved in such 
cases.  
Fourth, policy analysis. The policy analysis has focused on two fundamental sources: the Financial 
Action Task Force (FATF) and the European Union. Given the territorial scope of the research, 
the choice has been to solely focus on European sources. The Fi nancial Action Task Force has 
been included due to its fundamental, overarching role in anti -money laundering regulation. 
Eminently, as demonstrated throughout the thesis, the European regulation is intimately 
connected with FATF’s Guidances and can only be understood in connection with them. From a 
European perspective, the two main sources analysed are primary European Union legislations 
(Directives and Regulations) and the Guidelines issued by the sectorial supervisor, the European 
Banking Authority (EBA). National legislations have remained out of the scope of the present 
analysis. This certainly can be seen as  a limitation of the present work . However, the European 
case is one of great relevance. Firstly, the Union has been a pioneer in the regulation of crypto -
assets. Particularly, the introduction of the Market in Crypto-assets Regulation (MiCaR) constitutes 
one of the first attempt s worldwide to provide for a comprehensive regulation of the market. 
 29 
Secondly, the European Union has placed itself, during the last decades, as a global leader in policy 
making. The impact of the so-called “Brussels effect” is widely recognized by the literature.44 This 
makes an analysis of the European legislation crucial not only to understand a regional trend but 
also at hinting the global direction of the policy strategy. Thirdly, while anti -money laundering 
regulation has, up until now, been partially a nationa l competence – through the issuance of the 
Anti-money Laundering Directives – this is about to change. The new Anti -money Laundering 
Package centralizes the competence of the European Union  by establishing a centralized 
supervisor (the Anti-money Laundering Authority) and partially substituting the Directive with a 
Regulation. Particularly, the policies concerning crypto -assets are exclusively spelled out by the 
(directly applicable) Regulation of the upcoming Package. The same goes with the MiCaR which, 
again, is a directly applicable regulation. This makes a solely European analysis still highly valuable. 
Finally, by focusing on the European perspective the thesis has a clear policy objective: to provide 
insights to the European legislator on the efficacy of its policy strategy and advise on possible 
avenues for amelioration. The present moment is a topica l one for the drafting of a European 
strategy to crypto-assets: the MiCaR has just been approved, as well as the Travel Rule regulation,45 
and the Anti-money Laundering Package is in the making. Academia can act to better inform the 
legislator on the effectiveness of its choices so to influence the policymaking process and, 
ultimately, the overall strategy of crypto-assets policing. 
An overarching element that has enriched the scope and depth of the research is the three-month 
research stay of the researcher at the International Monetary Fund (IMF). There the researcher 
has supported the Financial Integrity Group (the unit of the IMF involved in the development of 
anti-money laundering related policies) in their work on crypto -assets regulation and specifically 
Central Bank Digital Currencies. While the information acquired during the stay was for internal 
use only – hence, not employed for the thesis – the experience has provided the researcher with a 
unique perspective on the functioning and policy approach of this sectorial policy-making body. 
Specifically, it has informed the researcher on the challenges such bodies face when providing 
solutions to the emerging problem of crypto-assets.  
 
 
44 See, A. Bradford, The brussels effect in Nw. UL Rev., 107, 2012, 1 
45 For more on the travel rule regulation see chapter 4, section 5. 
 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 31 
Chapter One 
 
From Bitcoin to e-Renminbi  
A brief history of blockchain 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Risen from the ashes of the deepest confidence crisis in the financial infrastructure of the last 
decades, blockchain aims to redesign the way trust is managed and administered in digital, complex 
economies. Through code -enabled trust, blockchain promises to facilitate secure peer -to-peer 
interactions making traditional trust-brokers – like banks, notaries, land registries, etc. - obsolete.1  
This shift in the architecture of trust brokerage has profound implications for a wide range of 
policy fields that take as a postulate precisely such pre-existing architecture.  
However, before delving into the intricacies of this technology and its policy repercussions, it is 
appropriate to briefly draw a timeline of blockchain’s development. Namely, if, on one hand, 
blockchain sinks its roots in times when Lehman Brothers was still a thriving investment bank, on 
the other hand, fifteen years after Nakamoto’s seminal paper, blockchain is far more than just a 
technology supporting a virtual currency. It is, therefore, appropriate to retrace the origins and 
development of this technology to fully understand its ideological roots and to catch a glimpse of 
its future impact.  
 
1 P. De Filippi – B. Loveluck, The invisible politics of bitcoin: governance crisis of a decentralized infrastructure, in Internet 
policy review, 5.4, 2016, 2; O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory 
response?, Banque de France Fintech-Innovation Hub, Paris, 2023, 2.   
 32 
A caveat before we start. The aim of this first brief account is not to go through all the ups and 
downs blockchain has experienced during the last decade. Given the scope of the present text, the 
purpose is to identify those elements that are topical to financial integrity and that can help in 
better understanding the policy actions in the field.  
To this end, the present chapter is structured as follows. The first section will analyse the origins 
of the crypto-assets movement. We will go back in time to understand what problems developers 
aimed to solve through crypto-assets, and what triggered their launch in 2009. The second section 
will analyse how crypto-assets have evolved since their creation. It will particularly focus on how 
the initial full decentralization proposed by blockchain has stood the test of time. We will delve 
into two “tales of decentralization” to examine the concrete evolution of this concept throughout 
time. Particularly, the evolution of mining and the DAO case provide insights into the practical 
hurdles connected with headless, code-based networks and/or organizations. The last section will 
delve into the future developments of blockchain. It underlines how the fully decentralised model 
proposed by its initial creator s is being modelled by the market. New implementations are being 
proposed that mix centralization with decentralization . These implementations partially rethink 
the fundamental tenets underlying blockchain and propose a “gentrified” version of it. The chapter 
ends with concise closing remarks. 
 
2. The origins story. Cypherpunks, cryptography, and Lehman 
 
Let’s then start with the origin story.  
The roots of the blockchain phenomenon can be traced back to the cypherpunk movement and, 
specifically, to their quest for enhanced, distributed, and accessible privacy.  2 Cypherpunks are a 
 
2 As stated by E. Hughes, a cypherpunks manifesto, 1993, “Privacy is necessary for an open society in the electronic age. 
Privacy is not secrecy. A private matter is something one does not want the whole world to know, but a secret matter is something 
one does not want anybody to know. Privacy is the power to selectively reveal oneself to the world”. 
 33 
loosely connected and defined movement 3 that formed in the early nineties in the San Francisco 
area around the figures of Timothy May, Eric Hughes, and John Gilmore. 4  
May, considered the founding father of crypto anarchism, had already laid out his ideological stance 
in the crypto anarchist manifesto, published in 1988. 5 There he had emphatically announced that 
“a specter is haunting the modern world, the specter of crypto anarchy”. Through this manifesto, he predicted 
that the nascent computer technology would provide individuals with a multipurpose tool for 
anonymity destined to reshape social and political interactions.  6 Interestingly, already in this very 
early text, the core trade -offs that, two decades later, would underlie the cryptocurrencies’ policy 
debate were clearly spelled out by May: 
“The State will of course try to slow or halt the spread of this technology, citing national security concerns, use of 
the technology by drug dealers and tax evaders, and fears of societal disintegration. Many of these concerns will be 
valid; crypto anarchy will allow national secrets to be traded freely and will allow illicit and stolen materials to be 
traded. An anonymous computerized market will even make possible abhorrent markets for assassinations and 
extortion. 7 Various criminal and foreign elements will be active users of CryptoNet. But this will not halt the 
spread of crypto anarchy”.8 
 
3 The term cypherpunk and the reference to this group is used in this text for reasons of clarity and to avoid 
unnecessary complexity. It is, however, crucial to underline that under this umbrella coexisted many 
different souls and perspectives - as underlined e.g., by P. Anderson, Cypherpunk ethics. Radical ethics for the 
digital age, Routledge, 2022 - and that not all the early proponents of digital currencies were necessarily part 
of the cypherpunk movement. Eminently, as this movement was fundamentally built around a mailing list 
and a philosophy of strong decentralization, it is clear that no official or unitary ideology existed. However, 
as highlighted by C. Jarvis, cypherpunk ideology: objectives, profiles, and influences (1992 -1998), in Internet Histories, 
2021, p. 7 – their general objectives were: 1) Unregulated citizen encryption access; 2) Anonymous 
communications; 3) Freedom to conduct anonymous economic transactions (crypto currencies); 4) 
Development of leaking platforms to constrain government power. 
4 See among many, C. Jarvis, cypherpunk ideology, cit.; P. Anderson, Cypherpunk ethics. Radical ethics for the digital 
age, cit.  
5 T. May, The cryptoanarchist manifesto, 1988 
6 C. Jarvis, cypherpunk ideology, cit., 5. 
7 This reference, in particular, well fits the flourishing dark market economy that has found in 
cryptocurrencies its means of exchange and funding, see R. Hardy - J. Norgaard, Reputation in the Internet 
black market: an empirical and theoretical analysis of the Deep Web  in Journal of Institutional Economics, 12, 3, 2016, 
515, 517; Chainalysis, The 2022 Cryptocrime Report , February 2022, 99; US Department of Treasury, Illicit 
Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, April 2023, 23. For an example of the use of bitcoin in such 
dark market transactions see the one analysed by E.W. Kruisbergen - E.R. Leukfeldt - E.R. Kleemans - 
R.A. Roks, Money talks money laundering choices of organized crime offenders in a digital age in Journal of Crime and 
Justice, 5, 2019, 574 – 575. 
8 T. May, The cryptoanarchist manifesto, cit. 
 34 
Building upon this vision of individual anonymity as the digital one -stop-shop for freedom, 
cypherpunks perceived unregulated and decentrali sed cryptography as the main tool to achieve 
such anonymity. 9 Notwithstanding May’s earlier predictions regarding  the inherently liberating 
potential of digital technologies, cypherpunks realized that digital technologies were a double -
edged sword for privacy. They understood that, without proper precautions, the progressive 
digitalization of interpersonal interactio ns allowed governments and corporations to access an 
unprecedented amount of data to profile and influence individuals. 10 To reinstate an appropriate 
limit to State control and avoid the establishment of an all -encompassing surveillance State, 
cypherpunks believed in grassroots organizations based on open -source and choral development 
of cryptography. Namely, they held that the economic and political incentives of control would 
have prevented governments and corporations from dispensing free privacy. In the absence of 
top-down solutions, it was, therefore, up to the citizens to organize and defend themselves from 
the increasing public and private intrusiveness by using cryptographic means. 
As stated in the cypherpunk manifesto,11 drafted by another of the founders of the cypherpunks, 
Eric Hughes, in 1993: 
“We cannot expect governments, corporations, or other large, faceless organizations to grant us privacy out of their 
beneficence. It is to their advantage to speak of us, and we should expect that they will speak. To try to prevent 
their speech is to fight against the realities of information. Information does not just want to be free, it longs to be 
free (…) We must defend our own privacy if we expect to have any. We must come together and create systems 
which allow anonymous transactions to take place”. 
 
9 C. Jarvis, cypherpunk ideology, cit., 7; P. De Filippi – B. Loveluck, The invisible politics of bitcoin, cit., 4, 
“cypherpunks, who saw strong cryptography as a means of achieving greater privacy and security of interpersonal 
communications, especially in the face of perceived excesses and abuses on the part of governmental authorities” 
10 P. Anderson, Cypherpunk ethics. Radical ethics for the digital age, cit., 2; as stated by D. Chaum, Achieving electronic 
privacy, in Scientific American, 267.2, 1992, 96 “Every time you make a telephone call, purchase goods using a credit card, 
subscribe to a magazine or pay your taxes, that information goes into a data base somewhere. Furthermore, all these records 
can be linked so that they constitute in effect a single d ossier on your life, not only your medical and financial history but also 
what you buy, where you travel and whom you communicate with. It is almost impossible to learn the full extent of the files 
that various organizations keep on you, much less to assure their accuracy or to control who may gain access to them”. 
11 E. Hughes, a cypherpunks manifesto, cit. 
 35 
In this quest for privacy through cryptography, cypherpunks were famously a vocal piece in the 
successful opposition to Clinton’s government bid to regulate cryptography by mandating the use 
of a “law-enforcement friendly” encryption language.12  
Of key importance for our ends is the work of cypherpunks in the field of digital currencies. 
Namely, the impact in terms of privacy of the shift from cash to digital transactions was a central 
topic of debate in these circles.13 Cash, by-design, allows to perform transactions without requiring 
any counterparties’ identification ;14 on the contrary, digital transactions require, by -design, the 
sender and the receiver to be identified. This shift means that, as clearly spelled out by David 
Chaum:15 
“the foundation is being laid for a dossier society, in which computers could be used to infer individuals’ life-styles, 
habits, whereabouts, and associations from data collected in ordinary consumer transactions”. 16 
Furthermore, such architecture of digital transactions constitutes the weak link in the 
cryptography-enabled privacy infrastructure envisioned by cypherpunks: in their view, 
cryptography would empower individuals to communicate and trade globally and anony mously. 
However, the non-anonymous nature of financial transactions meant that any digital exchange of 
value performed by two - otherwise anonymous - users would break the privacy circle permitting 
 
12 For a brief overview of the root causes of this clash see S. Levy, Battle of the Clipper Chip, in The New York 
Times, 12 June 1994, https://www.nytimes.com/1994/06/12/magazine/battle-of-the-clipper-chip.html  
13 See also the E. Hughes, a cypherpunks manifesto, cit., “When I purchase a magazine at a store and hand cash to the 
clerk, there is no need to know who I am. When I ask my electronic mail provider to send and receive messages, my provider 
need not know to whom I am speaking or what I am saying or what others are saying to me; my provider only need know how 
to get the message there and how much I owe them in fees. When my identity is revealed by the underlying mechanism of the 
transaction, I have no privacy. I cannot here selectively reveal myself; I must always reveal myself”; for an in-depth account 
of the growth and development of such fears see F. Brunton, Digital Cash. The unknown history of the anarchist, 
utopians, and technologists who created cryptocurrencies, Princeton University Press, 2019, 51 
14 F. Tronnier - D. Harborth - P. Hamm, Investigating privacy concerns and trust in the digital Euro in Germany , in 
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 53, 2022, 1; P. Panetta, Crypto-assets or virtual currencies as they were 
called before it was realized that they cannot perform the functions of money  in SUERF Policy Notes , 40, 2018, 
https://suerf.org/policynotes/3251/21st-century-cash-central-banking-technological-innovation-and-
digital-currencies. 
15 David Chaum is considered the spiritual father of digital currencies, back in 1989 he had started a 
company, DigiCash with the purpose of providing an anonymous digital means of payment. However, the 
venture never took off and the company declared bankruptcy in 1998. For an overview of DigiCash journey 
refer to the interesting interview of Chaum in 1999 see 
https://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/download/683/593/; se also F. Brunton, Digital Cash, 
cit., 54 - 55 
16 D. Chaum, Security without identification: Transaction systems to make big brother obsolete , in Communications of the 
ACM, 28.10, 1985, 1030. 
 36 
identification. Only through a peer-to-peer currency based on cryptography, that could mimic the 
privacy architecture of cash in the digital realm, full-privacy could be achieved.17   
To this end, numerous members of the cypherpunk circle – and beyond – worked on digital -
money solutions.18 None of them, however, really took hold, until Bitcoin. Behind such failures, 
there are both technological and socio-political reasons.19 Namely, if Nakamoto’s20 solution, as we 
will explore in the following chapter, provides an answer to a series of dilemmas that had prevented 
decentralized currencies from thriving, the socio-political environment characterizing the second 
decade of the 21st century also played a crucial role.  
Nakamoto chose a strategic moment to release its paper and launch Bitcoin. The 2008 financial 
crisis was a painful depiction of what can go wrong in an intermediated world. A systemic short -
circuit of intermediaries caused by a failure of market and legisl ative incentives 21 - meant to 
guarantee their integrity and police risk appetite – sent shockwaves across the globe.22  
To rub salt in the wound, the crucial role of intermediaries for economies paradoxically forced 
Governments to flush vast amounts of money to save the same institutions that had caused the 
crisis, while individuals were largely left stranded. Even though t he exact figure is contentious, 
 
17 C. Jarvis, cypherpunk ideology, cit., 9. 
18 P. Anderson, Cypherpunk ethics. Radical ethics for the digital age , cit., 68 and ss; F. Brunton, Digital Cash. The 
unknown history of the anarchist, utopians, and technologists who created cryptocurrencies, cit. 
19 As affirmed by P. De Filippi – B. Loveluck, The invisible politics of bitcoin, cit., 5, “the creation of the Bitcoin 
network was in large part motivated in response to the social and cultural contingencies that emerged during the global financial 
crisis of 2008”.  
20 Satoshi Nakamoto is the phantomatic father of Bitcoin. They appeared in 2008 through the publication 
of the Bitcoin paper and remained active in the community, which they steered in its first phases, until 2012 
when they disappeared. Their identity is sti ll a mystery even though a number of hypotheses have been 
formulated during the years. For more information see P. Vigna, Who Is Bitcoin Creator Satoshi Nakamoto? 
What We Know —and Don’t Know, in Wall Street Journal, 7 December 2021, 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/who-is-bitcoin-creator-satoshi-nakamoto-what-we-knowand-dont-know-
11638020231.  
21 While the root causes of the financial crisis are still the object of a heated debate, it is widely recognized 
that one of the main causes has been the lack of legislative and market constraints to the risk taking 
behaviour of the financial sector, see G. de la Dehesa, Twelve Market and Government Failures Leading to the 
2008–09 Financial Crisis, Group of Thirty, 2009; E. Coghlan – L. McCorkell – S. Hinkley, What Really Caused 
the Great Recession?, Berkley Institute for Research on Labor and Employment Policy Brief, 2018. 
22 As underlined by K. Fatjon – E. Martino – A. M. Pacces, fintech and The Law and Economics of 
Disintermediation, Routledge Handbook of Financial Technology and Law, 2021, 6, the financial crisis of 
2008 spurred the introduction and development of a wide array of peer -to-peer lending and transaction 
platforms besides blockchain. 
 37 
MIT Sloan professor Deborah J. Lucas calculated that the total direct cost of crisis-related bailouts 
in the United States amounted to four hundred ninety-eight billion dollars.23  
Nakamoto was not shy in underlining this paradox: famously, the genesis block of Bitcoin bears 
the following message “The Times 03/Jan/2009 Chancellor on brink of second bailout for banks”. This is 
a quote to the headline of an article published by the London Times detailing the mounting 
pressure on the British Chancellor Alistair Darling to flush additional resources into the banking 
system to avoid systemic failure.24 
Within this social and political environment, Bitcoin branded itself as a way out of the 
intermediated system that had just shown its darkest side. Through a payment infrastructure “based 
on cryptographic proof instead of trust ”,25 any two willing parties were empowered to transact directly 
with each other without the need to use a trusted third party – i.e., an intermediary. 26 In brief, 
Bitcoin promised to allow anyone to “be his own Bank” 27 in a moment when Banks seemed like 
unreliable business partners.28 
Bitcoin, furthermore, largely achieved the cypherpunk vision of providing a pseudonymous, 
decentralized, and cryptographically secure means of payment. As detailed in the following 
chapter, Bitcoin, through the ingenious use of asymmetric cryptography, allows any two parties to 
transact securely without any need for personal identification, thus bypassing the traditional design 
of digital transactions. Additionally, Bitcoin is rooted in open -source code and dece ntralized 
governance, which makes any form of unilateral and centralized dictamen extremely difficult to 
 
23 D. Lucas, Measuring the Cost of Bailouts, in Annual Review of Financial Economics, 11, 2019, 85-108. 
24 F. Elliott – G. Duncan, Chancellor Alistair Darling on brink of second bailout for banks , in The Times, 3 January 
2009, https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/chancellor-alistair-darling-on-brink-of-second-bailout-for-
banks-n9l382mn62h; A. Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, taxonomy and open 
challenges, in 2018 International Conference on Cyber Security and Protection of Digital Services (Cyber Security). IEEE,  
2018, 5. 
25 E. Martino, Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional comparative analysis, 
EBI Working Papers, 145, 2023, 4. As underlined by K. Werbach, The Blockchain and the new architecture of 
trust, The MIT Press, 2018, 17, Nakamoto’s statement that blockchain eliminates the need for trust is 
fundamentally incorrect, rather, blockchain restructures the way trust is administered and managed in 
complex societies by substituting trust in the intermedia ry in trust in the system – or as some would say 
trust in the code. 
26 S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System, 2009, https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf  
27 This sentence together with “in code we trust” has become the anthem of the Bitcoin movement 
underlining the ideological relevance of disintermediation, at least in the early adopters’ community. 
28 For a different interpretation of the relation existing between Bitcoin and the financial crisis, see M. 
Hütten, The soft spot of hard code: blockchain technology, network governance and pitfalls of technological utopianism , in 
Global Networks, 19/3, 2019, 341. 
 38 
enforce due to the absence of a central point of pressure.29 This means that, with the introduction 
of Bitcoin, online users can exchange value online without breaking the anonymity circle . Bitcoin 
completed the journey towards (pseudo)anonymity through cryptography cypherpunks had 
embarked on two decades earlier.  
The launch of Bitcoin closes, therefore, our origin story.  
 
3. The development. On decentralization, or a tale of human nature 
 
Of the years following the launch of Bitcoin much has been said. The present section will, however, 
focus on one fundamental thread of blockchain’s early (and present) years: the increasing 
challenges and related failures suffered by its fully decentralized model of governance.  
As detailed in the previous section, for blockchain’s early developers, decentralization was not 
simply a design feature it was an ideological choice. Even more, the first implementation of 
blockchain, Bitcoin, was not merely conceived as a decentralized t echnology but as a conduit of 
decentralization. Indeed, through a decentralized, private, and cryptographically secure currency, 
cypherpunks envisioned a system for individuals to transact out of the purview of the – corporate 
and State – Leviathan.  
Decentralization sits, thus, at the core of the original blockchain project and constitutes one of its 
preeminent ideological as well as technological features. However, when the utopia became reality 
– as Bitcoin and other blockchain implementations gained mainstream adoption – some cracks in 
the cypherpunk theoretical structure started to surface. If blockchain was envisioned as a system 
to substitute trust in third parties with trust in the code, the last decade has shown how third-party 
intervention may still be needed – at least when crises emerge.  
The full decentralization of the archetypal blockchain certainly represents an interesting case study 
for self -regulation. It is, however, also a clear example of the limits of self -regulation and the 
 
29 Banca d’Italia, Comunicazione della Banca d’Italia in materia di tecnologie decentralizzate nella finanza e cripto-attività, 
Rome, 2022, 8. 
 39 
rationale of vertical organizations in modern human societies. Blockchain has shown that code can 
be a conduit of regulation, it has, however, also shown that it is not a magic wand that will simply 
make the need for law-making, and law-enforcement disappear.  
Two main underlying causes can be identified for this governance failure.  
On one hand, in a fully decentralized environment, the code tends to be static. Once engraved in 
the original infrastructure, code can only be modified through consensus, 30 and consensus is 
difficult to reach.31 This means that decentralized organizations tend to be resistant to change and 
slow in adapting to external stimuli. It is ten years that the Bitcoin community discusses possible 
modifications to the mining protocol to reduce its energy footprint; however, due to contrasting 
interests and ideological debates, there is no solution in sight. This makes decentralized 
organizations a sitting duck to opportunistic behaviour. As will be shown by the example of mining 
provided in the following section, 32 if there is no centralized authority that can police market 
failures, individual interest will usually have the better hand over the common one. This way 
transforming the decentralized dream into a Hobbesian state of nature.  
On the other hand, translating complex human interactions into clean, unambiguous code is a 
complex task.33 As shown by the case of the DAO, 34 code is blind, and, at least for now, without 
human overview, it has no ability to discern good over evil. Furthermore, code is a human product 
and, consequently, suffers from most of those fallacies that it is purported to replace. To think, 
thus, that unsupervised code can autonomously manage human relations and s olve the problem 
of opportunistic behaviour seems an oversimplification. When the code is cheated or fails, human 
intervention will still be needed. Namely, if ex ante many will agree to be solely regulated by code, 
ex post, the same people, once their sa vings have evaporated, will usually claim the good old 
redress.35  
 
30 C. Rueckert, Cryptocurrencies and fundamental rights, in Journal of Cybersecurity, 1, 2019, 8 
31 See as an example of such complexity the conflict on the block-size of Bitcoins detailed by P. de Filippi 
– B. Loveluck, The invisible politics of Bitcoin, cit. 
32 See Section 3.1. 
33 J. Grimmelmann, All Smart Contracts are Ambiguous, in Journal of Law & Innovation, 2019, 2, 1.  
34 See para 3.2. 
35 The acronym DAO stands for Decentralized Autonomous Organization. This is a bit of a confusing term 
as it is used to both describe a specific project – the one I currently refer to and that will be detailed in 
section 3.2 – and a category of smart contract-based organizations that are purported to act in a completely 
decentralized fashion. To add fuel to the fire the DAO project is also a Decentralized Autonomous 
Organization, hence the name. For more information regarding the DAO project please see sectio n 3.2, 
 40 
A clear example of such organizational failures is Bitcoin itself. Conceived by Nakamoto as a 
means of exchange alternative to fiat currencies, due to the absence of any regulator with the power 
to control the monetary supply, the Bitcoin experiences dizzying price fluctuation that has 
substantially made it unfit to be used as a means of exchange.36 
To sum up, if the blockchain origin story was largely a tale of decentralization, its development is 
certainly a tale of conflict. A conflict between the world of forms and the world of substance and, 
ultimately, between two perspectives on the essence of human incentives.  
To better understand the coordinates of this conflict, we will focus on two moments of 
blockchain’s recent history which I believe are telling of these challenges and their underlying 
reasons. Also, we believe these two moments highlight the limits of full decentralization and 
remind us of the root causes and benefits of regulation. 
 
3.1 The law of the jungle. The centralization of mining 
 
The first of our tales is mining.  
Mining is the system envisioned by Nakamoto to permit  the creation and addition of new 
transactions to the blockchain. It constitutes, therefore, the dynamic dimension of Bitcoin’s 
blockchain and is one of the key aspects of the Proof of Work (PoW) consensus protocol. 37 To 
create and add new blocks (bundles of transactions), miners are required to devote computational 
power to solve a mathematical puzzle. In exchange for their work, they receive a reward in Bitcoin 
– so-called blockreward - every time they solve the puzzle and add a new block .38 The Bitcoin 
protocol is designed to keep the addition of new blocks stable at a rate of approximately one every 
 
for more information on the concept of Decentralized Autonomous Organizations see 
https://ethereum.org/en/dao/. 
36 P. de Filippi – B. Loveluck, The invisible politics of Bitcoin , cit., 10, for an overview of Bitcoin’s price 
fluctuations see https://www.coindesk.com/price/bitcoin/  
37 For a detailed analysis of mining and Proof of Work see chapter 3, para 4. 
38 G. Hileman – M. Rauchs, Global cryptocurrency benchmarking study , Cambridge Centre for Alternative 
Finance, 2017, 86. 
 41 
ten minutes.39 This means that, if the overall ability of miners to add new blocks increases, the 
algorithm automatically and proportionately augments the difficulty of the puzzle to keep the rate 
of newly created blocks stable.40  
The structure of mining generates a classic prisoner dilemma: if no one increases its computational 
capacity then everyone spends less and earns more. However, if one of the miners increases its 
capacity then they will have a competitive advantage and, at least until everyone else catches up, 
will receive a significant extra profit. At the same time, if everyone upgrades its computational 
capacity, the software will automatically upgrade the difficulty, and everyon e will earn the same 
while spending more.  
The mechanism in question is the reason why, in the early Bitcoin era, it was possible to mine with 
a personal computer, whereas, currently, mining is carried out in so -called farms, comprised of 
hundreds of servers stored in warehouses, mining all day round. Eminently, as the price of Bitcoin 
soared, mining has become an increasingly remunerative endeavour. This has led to a mining “gold 
rush” which exponentially increased the overall computational power devoted to this activity and, 
therefore, the complexity of the connected puzzles.41  
Such frenzy is not simply a normal by -product of blockchain’s popularity, it is a dangerous 
development for Bitcoin and, apparently, one Nakamoto had not foreseen.  
Let’s see why. 
First, the spike in computational power needed to mine Bitcoins implies a corresponding growth 
in the network’s energy consumption. This has caused mounting concerns regarding Bitcoin’s 
 
39 L. Cocco – M. Marchesi, Modeling and Simulation of the Economics of Mining in the Bitcoin Market , in PLoS 
ONE, 11(10), 2016, 4; C. Pelker Alden – C. Brown – R. Tucker, Using Blockchain Analysis from Investigation to 
Trial, in Department of Justice Journal of Federal Law and Practice, 69, 2021, 61. 
40 K. O’Dwyer – D. Malone, Bitcoin Mining and its Energy Footprint,  in, Proceedings of the 25th Joint IET Irish 
Signals & Systems Conference 2014 and 2014 China-Ireland International Conference on Information and Communications 
Technologies (ISSC 2014/CIICT 2014), 2014, 283, “The difficulty, D, is recalculated every 2016 blocks, with the aim 
of keeping the average time to discover a new block near 10 minutes. At this ideal speed, 2016 blocks will be discovered every 
two weeks. To calculate the new difficulty, the length of time  that it took to calculate the last 2016 blocks is used to estimate 
the hash rate of the entire Bitcoin network. The new difficulty is selected so that if the same average hash rate is maintained, it 
will take two weeks to calculate the next 2016 block”. 
41 K. O’Dwyer – D. Malone, Bitcoin Mining and its Energy Footprint, cit., 283 
 42 
environmental impact. As calculated by the University of Cambridge,42 currently Bitcoin consumes 
more energy than some relatively big Nations such as Sweden or the Netherlands, and this number 
is expected to further increase.43 Such energy consumption for a technology which practical use is, 
at least currently, merely that of speculative investment, seems to many unjustified. This is causing 
mounting pressure on Bitcoins by regulators, NGOs, 44 and public opinion, 45 which may even 
hinder its long-term survival. Symbolic is the – although failed – attempt of a group of Members 
of the European Parliament to add to the Market in Crypto -asset Regulation (MiCa R) a ban on 
the use of Proof of Work in the European Union, de facto  banning Bitcoin, precisely due to 
environmental concerns.46  
Second, and topical to our ends, this increase has also caused a corresponding centralization of 
mining. As mining becomes more energy intensive and single-purpose hardware is developed47 the 
possibility for individuals to mine Bitcoin has shrunk to the point of nonexistence. This means 
that mining is currently primarily carried out by professional players.  
The progressive c entralization of the mining industry raises both an ideological and a security 
problem.  
From the former perspective, mining was initially conceived as an activity carried out by users in 
a decentralized fashion. 48 Each user could devote a share of its computational power to the 
 
42 For this and other information and statistics regarding Bitcoin’s energy consumption see the Cambridge 
Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index compiled by the University of Cambridge, 
https://ccaf.io/cbeci/index/comparisons 
43 R. Choo, Bitcoin’s Impacts on Climate and the Environment, in State of the Planet (Columbia Climate School Blog) , 
20 September 2021, https://news.climate.columbia.edu/2021/09/20/bitcoins-impacts-on-climate-and-
the-environment/  
44 One of such examples is the “Change the code not the climate” initiative by Greenpeace, for more 
information see https://www.cleanupbitcoin.com  
45 See European Parliament, Cryptocurrencies in the EU: new rules to boost benefits and curb threats , Press Release, 
14 March 2022, “ Mechanisms used to validate transactions in crypto -assets have a substantial environmental impact, 
particularly for proof -of-work mechanisms, requiring a lot of energy and resulting in a high carbon footprint and generating 
electronic waste. According to most estimates, the energy consumption of Bitcoin equals that of entire small countries”. 
46 S. Handagama, Proposal Limiting Proof of Work is rejected in  EU Parliament Committeee vote , in CoinDesk, 14 
March 2022, https://www.coindesk.com/policy/2022/03/14/proposal-limiting-proof-of-work-is-
rejected-in-eu-parliament-committee-vote-sources/ 
47 These are known as application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC), see K. O’Dwyer – D. Malone, Bitcoin 
Mining and its Energy Footprint, cit., p. 283; see L. Cocco – M. Marchesi, Modeling and Simulation of the Economics 
of Mining in the Bitcoin Market, cit., for a description of the historical phases of Bitcoin mining, 5. 
48 For a different analysis regarding the real level of decentralization during the early days of mining see the 
research by A. Blackburn et al., as reported by S. Roberts, How ‘Trustless’ Is Bitcoin, Really? in The New York 
 43 
maintenance of the common network and, in exchange, earn some pocket money 49. With the 
professionalization of this activity, individual users are cut out of one of the fundamental functions 
of blockchain. This way a piece of the “network by the users for the users” is lost, as mining is no 
longer in the hands of individuals but is shifted towards increasingly larger corporations.50  
From the latter perspective, one of the premises of blockchain security is that, to guarantee the 
integrity of the ledger, no entity can control more than fifty percent of the computational power 
of the network. If the threshold is passed, the entity could manipulate the content of the ledger at 
will – wedging what is known as a fifty one percent attack.51 Such a threshold was not problematic 
as long as mining was a decentralized activity carried out by individual users. However, as it morphs 
into a professional and centralized activity, a small number of entities have come to control a large 
share of the m arket and its computational power. This means that the risk of a fifty one percent 
attack is not a theoretical possibility anymore, but a very concrete reality.52 
The question is, then, how could this happen, and why did nobody stop it. The answer brings us 
back to the tension between decentralization and centralization. Namely, the centralization of 
mining offers an interesting cautionary tale to anyone devising a fully decentralized solution, as it 
displays the limits of full decentralization.  
Eminently, one of the fundamental steps in the specialization and professionalization of mining 
has been the adoption of the so -called application -specific integrated circuits (ASIC). 53 These 
pieces of  hardware are specifically designed for mining and, therefore, are sizably better at 
performing this activity. Their adoption, thus, creates entry barriers to the market as it gives a 
competitive advantage to professional miners and reduces the probability  for an individual using 
 
Times, 6 June 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/06/06/science/bitcoin-nakamoto-blackburn-
crypto.html, that unveiled that actually mining was highly centralized also in Bitcoin’s early days. 
49 G. Hileman – M. Rauchs, Global cryptocurrency benchmarking study, cit., 86. 
50 A. Blandin et al., 3rd Global Cryptoasset Benchmarking Study, Cambridge Center for Alternative Finance, 2020, 
30. 
51 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 20. E. 
Ittay – E. Gün Sirer, Majority is not enough: Bitcoin mining is vulnerable , in International conference on financial 
cryptography and data security . Springer, 2014, actually proved that even a minority pool of miners could 
manipulate the content of the blockchain through what they call selfish mining. 
52 P. de Filippi – B. Loveluck, The invisible politics of Bitcoin, cit., 16; for a different “economic” interpretation 
of the security impact of mining’s centralization see Y. Sompolinsky – A. Zohar, Bitcoin's underlying incentives, 
in Communications of the ACM, 61.3, 2018, p. 50 and ss, “On the other hand , it (ASICs)introduces a form of barrier-
to-exit, as miners cannot repurpose their equipment to other economic activities; it therefore contributes to security”; A. Blandin 
et al., 3rd Global Cryptoasset Benchmarking Study, cit., 30. 
53 A. Blandin et al., 3rd Global Cryptoasset Benchmarking Study, cit., 32. 
 44 
a normal computer to successfully mine a block. 54 Satoshi Nakamoto foresaw the effects of this 
upgrade and tried to stop it. In one of his last posts,55 he proposed to: 
“have a gentleman’s agreement to postpone the GPU56 arms race as long as we can for the good of the network. 
It’s much easier to get new users up to speed if they don’t have to worry about GPU drivers and compatibility. It’s 
nice how anyone with just a CPU can compete fairly equally right now”.57 
He was, however, unsuccessful and ultimately unable to stop this development and the connected 
mining arms race.  
The mining saga underlines two glitches in fully decentralized environments. First, in the absence 
of rules to keep the market decentralized, there is a concrete possibility that a small group of 
motivated individuals will eventually take over the most remunerative positions and, at least 
partially, recentralize the system. Second, in the absence of any f orm of centralized governance, 
competition is the only rule of the game. In such a situation, if individual and common interests 
are not aligned, the former is likely to prevail, generating detrimental effects for the commons. 
 
3.2 From code is law to code without law. Ethereum and the DAO 
project 
 
The second of our tales is the DAO58 project.  
To understand the DAO, we must first introduce Ethereum. Ethereum is a blockchain network 
created by Vitalik Buterin in 2014. Ethereum builds upon Bitcoin to create a multi -purpose 
 
54 Y. Sompolinsky – A. Zohar, Bitcoin's underlying incentives, cit., 50, “ASIC mining introduces a barrier-to-entry to 
the system, as ordinary people cannot simply join the mining efforts; it thus reduces decentralization ”; A. Blandin et al., 3rd 
Global Cryptoasset Benchmarking Study, cit., 21. 
55 Satoshi Nakamoto was an active member of the Bitcoin community until 2011 when he announced his 
“retirement” since then the governance of the currency has been passed to a group of individuals known 
as core developers. 
56 GPU stands for Graphic Processing Units. These were the first upgrade in the mining arms race as these 
Units performed hashing much faster compared with a normal Computer Processing Unit (CPU) 
57 K. Werbach, The Blockchain and the new architecture of trust, cit. 
58 For an explanation of this term see footnote 29. 
 45 
platform that applies the innovative trust model of blockchain to implementations that go beyond 
the currency.59  
Simply put, Ethereum permits the computation and decentralized execution of smart contracts. 60 
The main addition of blockchain, and hence Ethereum, to the pre -existing concept of smart 
contracts, is precisely its decentralization of governance. Namely, as, at least in theory, no one 
controls the blockchain, once the smart contract is computed and launched, its execution is blindly 
carried out by the network. This reduces the need for mutual trust between the parties as the only 
authority they must trust is the code. 61 Moreover, as smart contracts are automatically executed, 
their implementation eliminates – again, in theory – the need for courts or other dispute resolution 
bodies.62 
While the tag “smart contract” recalls legal agreements, smart contracts can be better understood 
as rules established through code and enforced automatically by a decentralized network. 63 Smart 
contracts can be, therefore, defined as a general-purpose instrument to establish rules among two 
or more individuals or to regulate the behaviour of digital objects or organizations.  
 
59 See Ethereum’s website, https://ethereum.org/en/what-is-ethereum/; M. Hütten, The soft spot of hard code, 
cit., 331; The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, London, 2023, 136. 
60 The definition of smart contract was first introduced by N. Szabo, Smart Contracts , 1994, 
https://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/InformationInSpeech/CDROM/Literature/LOTwinterscho
ol2006/szabo.best.vwh.net/smart.contracts.html , who described them as “ a smart contract is a computerized 
transaction protocol that executes the terms of a contract. The general objectives of smart contract design are to satisfy common 
contractual conditions (such as payment terms, liens, confidentiality, and even enforcement), minimize exceptions both malicious 
and accidental, and minimize the need for trusted intermediaries. Related economic goals include lowering fraud loss, arbitration 
and enforcement costs, and other transaction costs ”; see also R. Caria, Definitions of Smart Contracts: Between Law and 
Code, in L. DiMatteo - M. Cannarsa - C. Poncibò (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Smart Contracts, Blockchain 
Technology and Digital Platforms, Cambridge University Press, 2019, 20. For an analysis of smart contracts see 
chapter 2 section 8.  
61 V. Gatteschi – F. Lamberti – C. Demartini, Technology of Smart Contracts, in L. Di Matteo - M. Cannarsa - 
C. Poncibò (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Smart Contracts, Blockchain Technology and Digital Platforms , 
Cambridge University Press, 2019, 44, “ once a smart contract is stored on the blockchain, its code cannot be changed 
and can be inspected by anyone (even though some programming skills are required to understand it). Hence, everyone could 
know and foresee the behavior of the smart contract”. 
62 R. Morrison – N. Mazey – S. Wingreen, The DAO controversy: the case for a new species of corporate governance? , 
in Frontiers in Blockchain 3, 2020, 2 
63 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response? , cit., 43 – 
44, defines a smart contract as “ a computer protocol that facilitates, verifies and executes transactions. These computer 
programs are not "smart" in the sense that they do not change their behaviour over time, but instead simply execute code when 
predefined conditions are met. Smart contracts are also not necessarily contracts in the legal sense. The term “automated clause 
execution tool” could thus better describe their nature”.  
 46 
Ethereum’s smart contracts, thus, permit the creation of innovative – “trustless” – forms of 
cooperation and coordination between individuals. 64 Among them, the computation of self -
executing rules allows the establishment of horizontal, headless organizations exclusively rooted 
in the law of the code.65 The main touted benefits of such organizations are that they reduce costs 
– eliminating intermediaries, such as directors – and allow the shareholders to directly engage in 
the management of the common good – reducing the dealignment between shareholders’  and 
directors’ interests. 66 Furthermore, as argued by Primavera De Filippi and Aaron Wright, the 
establishment of the “lex cryptographia” permits ex ante enforcement of rules and significantly 
narrows the possibility for opportunistic behaviour or non-compliance.67 
The first experiment in such an innovative decentralized management structure was launched in 
2016 under the name the DAO68 – an acronym for Decentralized Autonomous Organization. This 
project is a great example  of the opportunities and limits of decentralization and of the role the 
law will play in a future decentralized society.  
The DAO was an investor -directed venture capital fund. The idea was to create an investment 
fund in which choices of investment were decided directly by the shareholders eliminating the 
need for directors and other middlemen.69 In a nutshell, the DAO’s smart contract was entrusted 
with a budget in Ether – Ethereum’s native cryptocurrency. Once the Fund received investment 
offers by so-called contractors, it would broadcast them among its shareholders who would then 
vote and decide in which project/s to invest. The smart contract would, then, register the results 
and autonomously dispense the funds based on shareholder’s preferences. Any activity that went 
beyond the reception of offers and the disbursement of funds – such as hiring employees or paying 
 
64 R. Morrison – N. Mazey – S. Wingreen, The DAO controversy, cit., 3; O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, 
“Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 9. 
65 P. De Filippi – A. Wright, Blockchain and law. The rule of code, Harvard University Press, 2018; R. Morrison 
– N. Mazey – S. Wingreen, The DAO controversy, cit., 2; for an analysis of such organizations see chapter 5 
on DAOs regulation. 
66 As explained in the Ethereum’s website “ Starting an organization with someone that involves funding and money 
requires a lot of trust in the people you're working with. But it’s hard to trust someone you’ve only ever interacted with on  the 
internet. With DAOs you don’t need to trust anyone else in the group, just the DAO’s code, which is 100% transparent and 
verifiable by anyone”, see https://ethereum.org/en/dao/; see also R. Morrison – N. Mazey – S. Wingreen, The 
DAO controversy, cit., 9. 
67 P. De Filippi – A. Wright, Blockchain and law. The rule of code, cit. 
68 For an overview see, D. Harrison, Decentralized autonomous organization, Allen & Overy, 2016, 2 – 3; P. 
Hacker – C. Thomale, Crypto-securities regulation: ICOs, token sales and cryptocurrencies under EU financial law , in 
European Company and Financial Law Review , 4, 2018, 651. 
69 R. Morrison – N. Mazey – S. Wingreen, The DAO controversy, cit., 1. 
 47 
for a service – had to be voted by the shareholders.70 The whole project was rooted in the idea that 
the only rule was the rule of code as carved in the DAO’s smart contract.  
The venture was received with great excitement by the blockchain community, and the DAO 
raised the equivalent of one hundred and sixty million dollars in financing.71 Notwithstanding the 
extensive financing and the general excitement, the DAO never became operational as, before it 
had ever received any financing proposal, it was attacked by a, still unidentified, hacker that was 
able to exploit a vulnerability in the DAO’s code to drain its funds.72  
This attack opened one of the biggest crises in Ethereum’s history. In deciding how to respond to 
the hack, the developers were showing how far they were willing to go to uphold their values. 
Namely, if, as stated in the DAO’s terms of service, the only rule was the rule of code, then 
technically the hacker had legitimately obtained the funds as they had acted in accordance with the 
DAO’s source code. 73 Furthermore, to reverse the attack, Ethereum would have had to 
retroactively modify the content of its blockchain. This action would have broken the dogma of 
the immutability of the ledger and proved that Ethereum was not a fully censorship -resistant 
autonomous network, given that it could be manipulated by a relatively small group of 
programmers.74 Finally, and at a more general level, reversing the attack would have proven that 
the rule of code does not eliminate the need for  centralized human intervention: when disputes 
arise, or crime happens, human societies – even if digital – still need third party involvement. Thus, 
 
70 D. Harrison, Decentralized autonomous organization, cit., 3; P. Hacker – C. Thomale, Crypto-securities regulation: 
ICOs, token sales and cryptocurrencies under EU financial law, cit., 651. 
71 M. Hütten, The soft spot of hard code: blockchain technology, cit., 336; P. Hacker – C. Thomale, Crypto-securities 
regulation: ICOs, token sales and cryptocurrencies under EU financial law, cit., 651. 
72 For an account of the facts and of the subsequent investigation see M. Leisig, My trip Down the Crypto 
Rabbit Hole in search of the DAO hacker, in Bloomberg, 16 September 2020, 
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-09-16/a-trip-down-the-crypto-rabbit-hole-in-search-
of-the-dao-hacker  
73 As reported by M. Hütten, The soft spot of hard code: blockchain technology, cit., p. 337, “ Some members of the 
Ethereum community even argue that the presumed ‘theft’ of funds by the hacker was not even ‘theft’ but in line with the 
DAO’s terms, since they state that whatever the code allows someone to do would be the intention of the code”; D. Harrison, 
Decentralized autonomous organization, cit., 5, “ in the case of The DAO, the hacker merely used the code to his or her 
advantage; in that sense, they acted in accordance with the terms of the smart contract and arguably there was no hack”. 
74 D. Harrison, Decentralized autonomous organization, cit., 7, “To circumvent the rules of The DAO by a hard fork is 
to undermine the principles of immutability, trust, and decentralization which are core tenets of the blockchain and its smar t 
contracts”. 
 48 
disproving the claim that blockchain would bypass courts and make dispute resolution bodies 
obsolete.75 
Notwithstanding all these high level ethical , legal, and philosophical concerns, the community 
decided that “money is money” and the transactions were reversed.76 The Ethereum foundation – 
among which there were some of the most prominent investors in the DAO – and its founder, 
Vitalik Buterin, convinced the network to proceed with a hard fork 77 that erased the attack. 
However, to highlight the paradox of such a move in a decentralized environment, not all miners 
backed the hard fork, and some decided to keep mining the old Ethereum blockchain. De facto, 
this duplicated Ethereum with the original version of the Ethereum’s blockchain being renamed 
Ethereum Classic.78  
Interestingly enough, notwithstanding the clear conflict between Ethereum’s actions and its core 
values, the network weathered the storm. 79 Ethereum is currently one of the most prominent 
blockchain platform , and it is the main infrastructure for the market’s latest decentralized 
innovations – as Non-Fungible Tokens (NFT) and Decentralized Finance (DeFi). 
 
4. The future. Orwell or Rousseau? 
 
75 As reported by D. Harrison, Decentralized autonomous organization, cit., 4, “For opponents, a hard fork would be 
entirely antithetical to Ethereum’s cause. Ethereum’s stated purpose, after all, is to provide an immutable, incorruptible record 
and a platform for unstoppable, code-as-law smart contracts. The hard fork would amount to an intervention – a bail-out of 
The DAO – seemingly at the b ehest of The DAO’s biggest investors (themselves Ethereum developers and influential 
community members)” 
76 As noted by M. Hütten, The soft spot of hard code: blockchain technology, cit., 330, “When the highly publicized but 
faultily crowdfunded venture fund called ‘The DAO’ (an instance of a decentralized autonomous organization) was deployed 
on the Ethereum blockchain, the techno-utopianism was suspended, and developers fell back on strong network ties”. As it is 
obvious, mine is partially a simplification and partially a speculation regarding the root causes of the choice 
that led the Ethereum community to reverse the blockchain.  
77 A hard fork is a permanent split in the blockchain that causes the coexistence of two parallel ledgers, in 
the case of Ethereum, Ethereum (the new version where the attack had been erased) and Ethereum classic 
(the old version where the attack still had happened); for a clear description of the DAO fork see Security 
and Exchange Commission, Release No. 81207 / July 25, 2017. Report of Investigation Pursuant to Section 21(a) of 
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934: The DAO, Washington, 2017, 9. 
78 Ethereum classic is still operational today six years after the attacks; see also, R. Morrison – N. Mazey – 
S. Wingreen, The DAO controversy, cit., 7. 
79G. Hileman – M. Rauchs, 2017 global cryptocurrency benchmarking study , Cambridge Center for Alternative 
Finance, 2017, 16, “The price of ether has also recovered since a series of attacks on the Ethereum ecosystem, starting with 
the DAO hack in June 2016, and increased 8x since its 2016 low of less than $7 in December”.  
 49 
 
The previous  section has retraced how the fully decentralized dream of the early blockchain 
developers was confronted with the hard realities of governance and human nature.80 The present 
section will, then, analyse how the market has responded to such failures and the resulting clash 
between centralization and decentralization that distinguishes the current (and future) blockchain 
landscape. Namely, if the archetypal blockchain was fully decentralized, both in its l ogic and 
governance structure, the last few years have seen a progressive development of (semi)centralized 
projects.81  
This is partially a response to the abovementioned failures and inefficiencies of fully decentralized 
projects, that have reminded the market of the rationale of the traditional intermediated 
infrastructure.  
This is also, however, due to two historical trends. 
On one hand, as the price of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies soared and the tokens attained 
larger adoption, “lay” users have increasingly demanded centralized services. Providers – such as 
cryptocurrency wallets, exchangers, etc. – have moved away from the peer-to-peer model towards 
an increasingly centralized industry.82 If (at least some) cypherpunks thought that they needed to 
free “the people” from the tyranny of intermediaries, the recent history of blockchain seems to 
raise doubts regarding whether the people want to be freed at all.  
On the other hand, as states and corporations jumped on the blockchain bandwagon, they have 
started to model the technology to their statutory needs and obligations – e.g., privacy regulations 
and intellectual property protection. 
 
80 For another tale of centralization see P. de Filippi – B. Loveluck, The invisible politics of Bitcoin, cit., p. 13, 
“(this conflict) has also emphasised the tension between the (theoretically) decentralised nature of the Bitcoin network and th e 
highly centralised governance model that has emerged around it, which ultimately relied on the goodwill and aligned interests of 
only a handful of people”.  
81 D. Boreiko – G. Ferrarini – P. Giudici, Blockchain startups and prospectus regulation , in European Business 
Organization Law Review, 20, 2019, 674. 
82 For an overview of the industry see G. Hileman – M. Rauchs, Global cryptocurrency benchmarking study, cit., 
25; I. Karasek -Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering instruments and European data protection 
requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces in Journal of Cybersecurity, 1, 2021, 3. 
 50 
Within this prism, a new, less activist, form of blockchain has emerged during the last decade – 
the private and/or permissioned ledgers. 83 This second stream separates the decentralization of 
the information from the decentralization of the control. From this perspective, blockchain is 
envisioned as a trust accelerator or enabler rather than a system to reinvent pre -existing power 
structures. Through blockchain the information is kept in one common ledger rather than in 
private fragmented ledgers, this streamlines trust brokerage and lowers information reconciliation 
costs. At the same time, this type of blockchain does not entail a complete loss of control on the 
side of the participants as it still provides for a customizable degree of centralized governance.84  
Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDCs)85 - such as the recently launched Chinese e-Renminbi – 
are a great example of this second stream of development: with blockchain, Central Banks can 
create a single ledger where to register all transactions performed with the sovereign fiat currency 
while allowing intermediaries and individuals to interact with that ledger. However, CBDCs do not 
in any way imply that Central Banks lose control of the monetary supply. Quite the contrary, 
CBDCs provide to these institutions a larger control, not only of the monetary supply but, in 
general, of the financial flows as these are now registered in a logically centralized ledger held by 
the Central Bank.  
 
83 For an analysis regarding the differences between Public and Private blockchains see P. Jayachandran, 
The difference between public and private blockchain , in Blockchain Pulse: IBM Blockchain Blog , 
https://www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/2017/05/the-differen- ce-between-public-and-private-
blockchain/; on a possible reversion of this trend towards private blockchains see P. Brody, How public 
blockchains are making private blockchain obsolete , https://www.ey.com/en_gl/innovation/how-public-
blockchains-are-making-private-blockchains-obsolete; A. Shahaab et al., Applicability and Appropriateness of 
Distributed Ledgers Consensus Protocols in Public and Private Sectors: A Systematic Review, in IEEE Access, 7/2, 2019 
describes and classifies blockchains as “ Public DLTs are fully decentralised. No one controls the network and 
participation in consensus process is open to everyone and all transactions are visible to the public. This “openness” ensure s 
that the data on the DLT cannot be changed once it has been validated and accepted by the network. Bitcoin and Ethereum 
are examples of a public DLTs. In private DLTs, only authorized nodes from an organization can take part in the consensus 
and have read/write permission in private DLTs. One or multiple entities c ontrol the access to the private DLTs, restricting 
the participation in the network. Hyperledger Fabric and Multichain are examples of private DLTs. Consortiums are 
essentially private DLTs shared between multiple organizations. Different organizations com e together to form a consortium 
and nominate members to take part in the consensus process. Quoram and Corda are examples of consortium DLTs ”. For 
an analysis of permissioned blockchain see chapter 2 section 7. 
84 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response? , cit., 29; 
The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 36. 
85 For an insight in the functioning and rationale of CBDCs see G. Soderberg, Behind the Scenes of Central 
Bank Digital Currency Emerging Trends, Insights, and Policy Lessons, Fintech Notes International Monetary Fund, 
2022; see also for a collection of current projects the Bank of International Settlement Innovation Hub 
work in the field at, https://www.bis.org/about/bisih/publ.htm?m=3103  
 51 
On a similar note, in the private sector, the implementation of blockchain in the field of supply 
chain aims to provide the operators with a single source of truth that will guarantee to each one 
the control of their proprietary data. Just to mention one of such project, Maersk and IBM joined 
forces in mid-2017 to launch a blockchain project for the shipping industry. 86 This project, called 
TradeLens,87 aims at optimizing the flow of documents and thus saving costs and time. The 
partnership between IBM and Maersk aims to implement a platform that will enable better tracking 
of goods throughout the supply chain. It will also facilitate the real -time traceability of payments 
within the shipping industry and clearance procedures that could be subject to fraud. It is 
programmable based on each business logic of a potential client: the companies aim to bring the 
industry together on an open blockchain platform whereby all players involved in the global supply 
chain – i.e., exporters, importers, carriers, freight forwarders, shipping companies, terminals, 
customs, and government authorities, etc. – can participate to efficiently oversee the exchange of 
information as well as foster more intense collaboration across the supply chain. 
This trend towards, at least partial, centralization is of prime relevance for our ends as it constitutes 
the most impactful historical development for financial flow control as it could, ironically, turn an 
instrument conceived for decentralization and an onymity into a vehicle for perfect control. 
Namely, as explored in greater detail in the following chapters, blockchain’s decentralization of 
control is the crux of the financial integrity conundrum. 88 As correctly predicted by the 
cypherpunks, a fully decentralized and transnational infrastructure is particularly difficult to police 
and monitor as there is no single point of pressure to regulate and coerce. However, the same 
 
86 Y.A. Xia - S. Grover - R.C. Lieb, Keeping PACE with blockchain in ocean transportation , in Supply Chain 
Management Review, 2021, 25, 3; A. Schmahl - S. Mohottala - K. Burchardi - C. Egloff - J. Govers - T. Chan 
- M. Giakoumelos, Resolving the Blockchain Paradox in Transportation and Logistics, Boston Consulting Group, 
2019, available at https://www.bcg.com/it-it/publications/2019/resolving-blockchain-paradox- 
transportation-logistics.aspx report that as of March 2020, TradeLens included over 20 ocean carriers and 
providers, over 100 international ports and terminals, more than 10 government agencies, more than 20 
operators ports and terminals around the world (Port of Singapore Authority, Port of Rotterdam, etc.), 
global container shipping operators (Maersk Line, Hamburg Sud and Pacific International Lines), customs 
authorities (in Singapore, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, Australia) and logistics operators (e.g. CEVA 
Logistics, Damco, Kotahi, PLH Trucking Company, WorldWide Alliance); for other use cases see The law 
society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 38. 
87 See https://www.maersk.com/apa-tradelens. 
88 C. Kuner – F. Cate – O. Lynskey – C. Millard – N. Ni Loideain – D. Svantesson, Blockchain versus data 
protection, cit., 104, “ It is, however, the very openness, lack of permissioning, and potential anonymity that make public 
block- chain systems like Bitcoin problematic from a legal and regulatory perspective. For example, how can a financial services 
regulator check that anti-money laundering (AML) and know your customer (KYC) rules are being complied with if a large 
number of parties can transfer tokens between each other without involving any regulated entity or other intermediary that can 
be audited?”. 
 52 
infrastructure, if centralized governance is introduced, could present new opportunities for 
monitoring as the information structure of blockchain – logically centralized but organizationally 
decentralized89 - would provide a single source of truth to oversee  and analyse all financial 
transactions.  
This drift is also an interesting cautionary tale for digital enthusiasts in general. Namely, 
decentralization is frequently  presented as a key element of digital innovations. It is, however, 
seldomly underlined that individuals often prefer to, at least partially, outsource decisions and 
responsibilities to intermediaries. Internet ideology tends to be characterized by a utopi stic 
understanding of individuals that, in its extreme version, are presented as completely self-sufficient 
animals only longing “to be left alone”. 90 The net effect of this utopia has, however, mostly been 
to remove the power from established, and highly regulated, intermediaries – as States – to then 
see new, and much less regulated, intermediaries take their place.  
It is important to underline that this trend towards increased centralization in the blockchain 
market has been all but uncontested. Early developers and users – so-called purists – have pushed 
back on any form of centralized blockchain. Completely decentralized projects have flourished 
together with more traditional, corporate ones and the fight is far from over. 
However, some have seen in blockchain’s evolution a repetition of the Internet saga, from a haven 
of decentralization to a strictly surveilled oligopoly.91  
The emergence of this trend has been so marked and relevant to even push one of the ideological 
fathers of crypto to rethink the impact of digital currencies in terms of individual freedom. Namely, 
cypherpunks’ founder Timothy May has recently declared of Bitcoins: 
 
89 Quote from K. Werbach, The Blockchain and the new architecture of trust, cit., 7. With this sentence it is meant 
that, while blockchain decentralizes access to the ledger, it also centralizes information, by compiling in a 
single ledger all the information that were traditionally held by each intermediary. For more on the 
blockchain privacy structure see chapter two, section six. 
90 P. Anderson, Cypherpunk ethics. Radical ethics for the digital age, cit., 31 – 32. 
91 I. Bogost, Cryptocurrencies may be a path to authoritarianism , The Atlantic, 30 May 2017, 
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2017/05/blockchain-of-command/528543/; see also 
P. De Filippi – M. Mannan – W. Reijers, Blockchain as a confidence machine: The problem of trust & challenges of 
governance, in Technology in Society, 62, 2020, “the governance of most blockchain -based systems is highly centralized: on -
chain governance is inherently plutocratic, dominated by a few large operators or individuals who control most of the mining 
resources and/or token holdings, whereas off -chain governance most often operates as a technocracy, with a few influential 
players dominating both the front-stage and the backstage”. 
 53 
“There’s a real possibility that all the noise about ‘governance,’ ‘regulation’ and ‘blockchain’ will effectively create a 
surveillance state, a dossier society (…) Sorry if this ruins the narrative but I think the narrative is fucked. 
Satoshi did a brilliant thing, but the story is far from over”.92 
 
5. Final remarks 
 
Nearly two decades after the publication of the Bitcoin paper, blockchain has lived a roller coaster 
of emotions. Presented as a one -stop-shop for anonymity through cryptography, it has faced the 
hard truths and limits of decentralization. Still, it has somehow surv ived these crises, and, 
notwithstanding the critics, it continues to foster and promote innovation. At the same time, 
despite the frenzy and investments, this technology has still not produced any tangible large-scale 
implementation. Even Bitcoin, arguably  the most successful blockchain experiment, has 
fundamentally failed in its purpose of becoming a stateless global currency and is currently 
primarily a speculative investment asset.93  
However, while fifteen years may seem long in our digital age, it may just be that an innovation 
such as blockchain, that proposes a change in the fundamentals of our economic system, will take 
longer to take hold. Namely, even though no tangible use for cryptocurrencies has still been found, 
their value keeps rising94 – or some would say bubbling – up to a point where it cannot be ignored 
anymore.95 Also, new blockchain implementations keep emerging daily and receive a spasmodic, 
although sometimes brief, attention from the media, public opinion, the business and academic 
community – as N on-fungible Tokens , De centralized Finance, and C entral Bank Digital 
Currencies.  
 
92 Quote reported by P. Anderson, Cypherpunk ethics. Radical ethics for the digital age, cit., 72. 
93 P. de Filippi – B. Loveluck, The invisible politics of Bitcoin: governance crisis of a decentralised infrastructure, cit., 10; 
Bank of England, Financial Stability in Focus: Cryptoassets and decentralised finance, London, 2022, 7.  
94 Bank of England, Financial Stability in Focus: Cryptoassets and decentralised finance, cit., 10. 
95 E. Martino, Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional comparative analysis, 
cit., 8; E. McCaul, Mind the gap: we need better oversight of crypto activities, European Central Bank Blog, 5th April 
2023, 
https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/press/blog/2023/html/ssm.blog230405~03fd3d664f.en.ht
ml.  
 54 
Interestingly enough these implementations still cover the full decentralization spectrum, and no 
clear winner can be identified in the, abovementioned, fight for the soul of blockchain. On one 
side of the spectrum, Central Bank Digital Currencies aim to use the technology that promised to 
make Central Banks obsolete to issue fiat currencies. On the other side, Decentralized Finance 
(DeFi)96 promises to restructure the way financial services are offered to eliminate middlemen and 
promote rule by code. 97 Additionally, several other projects have flourished that mix 
decentralization and centralization.  
These two strands of blockchain development carry very different implications for the anti-money 
laundering regulation. Their coexistence, thus, requires the policymaker to recognize this historical 
trend and diversify its approach depending on whether the individual project decentralizes 
information storage, governance, or both. Namely, if in completely decentralized systems 
regulating may be too hard, in partially decentralized ones it could, paradoxically, be too easy and, 
therefore, require safeguards t hat guarantee privacy rather than transparency. 98 Technological 
customization is, hence, key in this field. 
 
 
 
 
96 OECD, Why Decentralised Finance (DeFi) Matters and the Policy Implications , Paris, 2022; O. Fliche – J. Uri – 
M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response? , cit., 2, defines decentralized 
finance as “a set of crypto-asset services, which are similar to financial services and carried out without the intervention of an 
intermediary”. 
97 World Economic Forum, Decentralized Finance (DeFi) Policymaker Toolkit, White Paper, 2021, 6, “the goal of 
DeFi solutions is to provide functions analogous to, and potentially beyond, those offered by traditional financial service 
providers, without reliance on central intermediaries or institutions”. 
98 This is, for instance, the case when it comes to CBDCs, as is clearly underlined by the great attention 
paid to privacy in the development of digital euro. As highlighted by the European Data Protection Board 
in its, European Data Protection Board, EDPB letter to the European institutions on the privacy and data protection 
aspects of a possible digital euro, 18 June 2021, “an inappropriate design of the forthcoming digital euro would bring significant 
risks under the data protection perspective. Relevant safeguards shall be put in place in order to avoid, for example, generalised 
tracking of user transactions throughout th e payment system and to address and mitigate the risk of excessive interference in 
privacy of the persons concerned by both centralized entities and market operators”, in a similar sense The White House, 
Technical evaluation for a U.S. Central Bank digital currency system, Washington, 2022, 65, “ even if policies exist to 
prevent this harm at this time, enabling this capacity could allow a future Administration to use the CBDC system to surveil 
the population in close detail”. 
 55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 56 
Chapter Two 
 
Understanding blockchain  
The technological background 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Having explored the historical rise and evolution of blockchain, it is now time to delve into its 
functioning. The present chapter aims to do this by outlining the main elements of this technology 
and drawing some internal distinctions. A caveat before we start, given the scope of the present 
work, it is not my purpose to provide an in-depth analysis of the technology. Rather, this chapter 
will delineate the logic underlying the blockchain so to fill with technical content the subsequent 
policy analysis and facilitate the reader’s understanding.  
So, what is blockchain? 
Blockchain is, fundamentally, a recordkeeping technology. While recordkeeping may seem like a 
trivial and inconsequential activity, it sits at the core of our social and economic infrastructure .1 
The who, where , and how of data storage is key in understanding the power balance and 
functioning of a community. Most importantly, record -keeping relates to one of the most 
 
1 As argued by B. Sudipta – G. B. Waymire, Recordkeeping and human evolution , in Accounting horizons 20/3, 
2006, 201 “systematic recordkeeping outside an individual brain is a necessary condition for the emergence of extended economic 
cooperation that ultimately leads to complex human societies, markets, and economic organizations ”, The law society, 
Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 26, “Recording the ownership and movement of value has 
been a central tenet of human civilisation”.  
 57 
significant and yet impalpable elements of organized societies: trust .2 While trust is a complex 
phenomenon – as it always needs a “touch of magic”, meaning a leap of faith that cannot be simply 
explained through logic 3 – its connection to the availability of reliable information is clear. To 
thrive and trade, people need to have access to trustworthy information that can guide rational 
decision-making.4 Flaws in crucial record -keeping systems – such as land registries, or financial 
intermediaries – hinder economic growth and ultimately the prosperity of a community.5 
Not only does the existence of solid record -keeping mechanisms shape a community’s fortune, 
but the way record -keeping is structured is a key element in understanding societal power 
dynamics.6 The entities entrusted – by regulation or market – with record-keeping functions gain 
enormous power from the knowledge they accrue and from their unique role as data sources. From 
financial institutions to tech giants, the entities managing valuable data  wield an enormous 
influence on our societies.7 
 
2 As underlined by D. Rousseau, et al., Not so different after all: A cross -discipline view of trust  in Academy of 
management review, 23/3, 1998, the definition and conformation of trust are debated topics; however, most 
commentators agree that trust entails one party taking a risk – more or less calculated and rational – and 
relying on another party in order to obtain a desired outcom e while having little or no control over the 
counterparties’ behavior. See the definition of B. Devdeepta – C. Camerer, Trust and Behavioral Economics in 
F. Krueger (eds.), The Neurobiology of Trust , Cambridge University press, 2021, 37, “ trust is defined as the 
expectation that another person (or entity) will repay a socially risky action by the trustor that benefited both the trustor  and 
the trustee, in a way that makes the trustor happy that she was trusting ” and the one of D. Rousseau, et al., Not so 
different after all: A cross-discipline view of trust, cit., 395, “Trust is a psychological state comprising the intention to accept 
vulnerability based upon positive expectations of the intentions or behavior of another”.  
3 As stated by P. De Filippi – M. Mannan – W. Reijers, Blockchain as a confidence machine: The problem of trust & 
challenges of governance, cit., 3, “ trust inevitably comes along with a certain degree of risk and vulnerability ”; see also B. 
Devdeepta – C. Camerer, Trust and Behavioral Economics, cit. 
4 P. De Filippi – M. Mannan – W. Reijers, Blockchain as a confidence machine: The problem of trust & challenges of 
governance, cit., 4; B. Sudipta – G. B. Waymire, Recordkeeping and human evolution, cit., 202. 
5 For a review of how trust level impact economic growth see B. Devdeepta – C. Camerer, Trust and 
Behavioral Economics, cit., 48. 
6 C. Findlay, Participatory cultures, trust technologies and decentralisation: innovation opportunities for recordkeeping , in 
Archives and Manuscripts, 45/3, 2017, 177. 
7 M. Finck, Blockchains and data protection in the European Union, in European Data Protection Law Review, 4, 2018, 
6. 
 58 
The blockchain can, thus, be described as a technology of trust .8 One that strikes at the heart of 
the traditional record -keeping infrastructure and proposes a new system to store and update 
valuable data9 with the normative aim of displacing classic power dynamics.10 
 
2. Understanding blockchain record -keeping mechanism. Trustless 
trust? 
 
Let’s, then, delve into the blockchain record-keeping system.  
Any record -keeping technology has a static element – how data is stored, and its integrity 
guaranteed – and a dynamic one – how data is updated, and its veracity ensured. Blockchain 
modifies both, to eliminate (or at least reduce) the reliance on trust intermediaries.11 As detailed in 
the historical section, this modification does not simply stem from an efficiency need, rather it is 
a normative choice – a “code through law” action – aimed (at least in theory) at giving back the 
control of data to the people.  
 
8 For a complete overview of the role of blockchain as a trust machine see K. Werbach, The Blockchain and 
the new architecture of trust, cit.; see also P. De Filippi – M. Mannan – W. Reijers, Blockchain as a confidence machine: 
The problem of trust & challenges of governance , cit.; A. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin. Programming the Open 
Blockchain, O’Reilly, 2017, 15. 
9 E. Budish, The Economic Limits of Bitcoin and Anonymous, Decentralized Trust on the Blockchain  in University of 
Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper, 83, 2022, 1. 
10 R. Auer Embedded Supervision: How to build regulation in decentralized finance, CESIFO Working Papers, 9771, 
2022, 3; D.A. Zetzsche - R.P. Buckley - D.W. Arner - M.C. van Ek, Remaining regulatory challenges in digital 
finance and crypto- assets after MiCA, European Parliament, 2023, 23, “DeFi seeks to address through technology what 
crypto proponents understand as the source of traditional finance’s instability: the centrality (if not dominance) of concent rated 
intermediaries and the ‘too -big-to-fail’ risks they embody – and the reliance o n the weaknesses of states, governments and 
regulators. DeFi envisages a utopia where technology replaces frail humans and their institutions: a world in which technology 
eliminates the risks inherent in the concentrated systems central to traditional finance”. 
11 M. Zou, Code, and other laws of blockchain  in Oxford Journal of Legal Studies , 40/3, 2020, 646; O. Fliche – J. 
Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 4; D.A. Zetzsche - R.P. 
Buckley - D.W. Arner - M.C. van Ek, Remaining regulatory challenges in digital finance and crypto- assets after MiCA, 
cit., 23; E. Martino, Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional comparative 
analysis, cit., 3. 
 59 
To understand the new approach, we need to first appreciate how things have been done until 
now.  
The traditional strategy to create shared trust in data has been the use of third parties .12 In the 
classic system, it is up to such trust intermediaries to store and update information. This means, 
from a record -keeping perspective, that each intermediary holds its private ledger and is solely 
responsible for its integrity and update. 13 When a transaction involving customers of different 
intermediaries – hence information stored in different ledgers – is carried out, these must 
communicate to reconcile their respective ledgers and ensure consistency.  
This record -keeping strategy has two main characteristics: it is centralized, in terms of 
access/control, and is fragmented, in terms of content. From the former perspective, it is 
centralized as information is privately held by each institution. Each intermediary retains exclusive 
access to its ledger and is the only one that can consult and adjourn it. From the latter perspective, 
it is fragmented as there is no shared ledger encompassing the whole market, each intermediary’s 
ledger only records that part of the information trail that pertains to its customer. 
To better understand the functioning of this record -keeping strategy let’s take financial 
transactions as an example. In the classic system, to access the digital financial market, everyone 
must open an account with an intermediary – i.e., a Bank or some other type of Financial Service 
Provider. The intermediary holds a ledger recording the balance of each customer and the 
transactions they have performed. When a transaction involves customers of different 
intermediaries, the two financial institutions comm unicate to guarantee that the information 
recorded in the respective ledger is consistent. This system is centralized, from a control 
perspective, as the ledger is held privately by each institution, and fragmented, from a content 
perspective, as the trans action trail is partitioned among the different intermediaries with each 
ledger only recording its side of the information.  
 
12 A. Blandin, et al., Global cryptoasset regulatory landscape study, in University of Cambridge Faculty of Law Research 
Paper, 23, 2019, 14, “Until recently, digital tokens mostly existed in the form of ledger entries in internal database systems 
maintained by trusted third parties. Blockchain and DLT systems are new shared accounting tools that enable distributed 
recordkeeping without the need to rely on a single controlling party”. 
13 D.A. Zetzsche - R.P. Buckley - D.W. Arner - M.C. van Ek, Remaining regulatory challenges in digital finance and 
crypto- assets after MiCA, cit., 23. 
 60 
The blockchain revolutionizes this record -keeping strategy. With blockchain all transactions 
carried out within a certain environment – e.g., a crypto-asset – are recorded in a single ledger 
which is shared and maintained by all the nodes – i.e., the participants – of the network.14  
The ledger is, hence, contrary to the traditional system, decentralized in terms of access/control, 
and centralized in terms of content. From the former perspective, the access is decentralized as 
each node holds one identical copy of the ledger. The information is simultaneously shared among 
all participants and each node has access to a complete copy of the same ledger. The same goes 
for the update of the ledger: there is no single authority that unilaterally updates it, on the contrary, 
this is done by all the nodes in a choral manner following a pre -established consensus protocol.15 
From the latter perspective, the content is centralized as all the information is recorded in the 
shared ledger. There is no private ledger held by a single intermediary solely recording the balances 
and transactions of its clients. Rather, there is a common ledger that records all interactions among 
all the participants in a logically centralized fashion. 
Let’s go back to our previous example of financial transactions to see how the record -keeping 
structure changes when blockchain is introduced. A classic example of a blockchain -based 
transaction system is Bitcoin. Let’s then analyse a Bitcoin transaction from a record -keeping 
perspective. Contrarily to the traditional system, to access the Bitcoin network users do not need 
an intermediary, although using one is possible. They can directly access the network through a 
so-called self-hosted wallet .16 If user A wants to, then, send Bitcoin to user B they create a 
transaction – meaning a computer command containing A’s digital signature, B’s address, and the 
amount to be transferred – and broadcast it to the network.17 Each node of the network checks if 
the transaction is valid – meaning that, according to their copy of the ledger, A owns the amount 
they intend to transfer and their signature is valid – and, if so, the latter is added to the common 
ledger by a miner node .18 Every node of the network can then access the ledger and check the 
 
14 H. Axelsen – J. Jensen – R. Omri, When is a DAO Decentralized?, in Complex Systems Informatics and Modeling 
Quarterly, 31, 2022, 53. 
15 For a detailed explanation of what a consensus protocol is see section 4 of this chapter; P. Hacker – C. 
Thomale, Crypto-securities regulation: ICOs, token sales and cryptocurrencies under EU financial law, cit., 650. 
16 For a more detailed analysis of how blockchain transactions work see section 5 of the present chapter; 
B. Mesquita – S. Maranhao – J. Seigneur, Enabling KYC and AML verification in DeFi service , Crypto Valley 
Association, Zug, 2022, 4. 
17 A. Trozze, et al., Cryptocurrencies and future financial crime, in Crime Science, 11/1, 2022, 2.  
18 E. Budish, The Economic Limits of Bitcoin and Anonymous, Decentralized Trust on the Blockchain,  cit., 10, “When 
a miner finds a lucky alphanumeric string, they publicly broadcast their block — consisting of the transactions, the hash of the 
previous block, their lucky alphanumeric string, and their block’s hash — to all of the other Bitcoin miners. Other Bitcoi n 
 61 
transaction. Moreover, given that all transactions are stored in a single common ledger, the whole 
money trail – meaning the chain of transactions preceding the one between A and B – can be 
pieced together by simply consulting the blockchain.  
 
3. The storage model 
  
Having detailed the logic underlying blockchain record-keeping, we must now delve into the nitty-
gritty of its functioning.  
As mentioned above, any record -keeping technology has two basic components: static and 
dynamic. This section will examine the static element of blockchain by describing how information 
is stored and its integrity ensured. To understand blockchain’s storage model we must distinguish 
among two levels: first, where and how the information is stored; second, where and how the 
ledger – meaning the record containing all the information – is stored.  
 
3.1 The storage of the data 
 
Starting from where and how the information is stored, the blockchain, as the name goes, is 
fundamentally a chain of blocks.19 Each block of the chain contains a fixed amount of information 
– in the case of Bitcoin, from one thousand to two thousand transactions20 – which is inextricably 
 
miners can quickly check whether the block is valid; that is, does the set of transactions in the block meet the criteria (…) and 
does the alphanumeric string indeed produce a valid hash with enough leading zeros. Note, critically, that while finding a lucky 
alphanumeric string is extremely computationally intensive, checking the validity of a given block is computationally trivial . 
For this reason, a valid block is “proof of work” — proof that the miner who found the block did a large amount of 
computational work in expectation”. 
19 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk -based approach. Virtual Currencies, Paris, 2015, 40; C. 
Leuprecht - C. Jenkins – R. Hamilton, Virtual money laundering: policy implications of the proliferation in the illicit 
use of cryptocurrency, in Journal of Financial Crime, 2022, 4. 
20 C. Pelker Alden – C. Brown – R. Tucker, Using Blockchain Analysis from Investigation to Trial, cit., 90. 
 62 
linked with the information recorded in the previous blocks. 21 The way these blocks are linked 
together is through the inclusion, in each block, of a hash of the data contained in the previous 
block.22  
To better understand how hashing guarantees the integrity of blockchain data we need to take a 
short detour and briefly introduce hashing. 
A hash can be defined as:  
“a mathematical function that converts an input of arbitrary length into an output of a fixed length. Thus, 
regardless of the original amount of data or file size involved, its unique hash will always be the same size”.23 
For instance, using the SHA -256 hashing function 24 the hash of the sentence  “Hello, how are 
you?” is “04cdee65fb33653432b0e56abd32c878f2a13286bfc6ddab85472fd3855d7f2e”, using the 
same function, the hash of the entire section two of this chapter is 
“6cd947fa4ceda20591c14ce78f9d0f8af573fec5c5785975eca23676ea80d031”. 
A hash is, thus, made up of three elements: the source data, the hashing function, and the hash. 
When the hashing function is applied to the source data it produces a hash – meaning an 
alphanumeric string of fixed length. To put it plainly, a hash can be described as a non-descriptive 
fixed length summary of a certain piece of information to which it is univocally linked. Even a 
slight modification of the source data will modify the connected hash. This guarantees that, as long 
as the hash is not modified, the underlying data is intact. To go back to our example, if we change 
even one letter of section two, this will modify the corresponding hash making any tampering 
immediately apparent.25 
 
21 D. Carlisle, Virtual currencies and financial crime: Challenges and opportunities , Royal United Services Institute 
for Defence and Security Studies, London, 2017, 3; M. Finck, Blockchains and data protection in the European 
Union, cit., 18. 
22 This use of hashes to chain together a sequence of blocks of data was first introduced by S. Haber - W.S. 
Stornetta, How to time-stamp a digital document in Journal of Cryptology, 3/2, 1991; E. Budish, The Economic Limits 
of Bitcoin and Anonymous, Decentralized Trust on the Blockchain, cit., 8; C. Pelker Alden – C. Brown – R. Tucker, 
Using Blockchain Analysis from Investigation to Trial, cit., 60. 
23 Definition provided by J. Frankenfield, Hash, in Investopedia, 13 January 2022 
24 For further info on SHA 256, N-able, SHA-256 Algorithm Overview, 12 September 2019, https://www.n-
able.com/blog/sha-256-encryption. 
25 M. Nofer, et al. Blockchain, cit., 184. 
 63 
Furthermore, hash functions are one-way functions. This means that given the message it is easy 
to compute its hash. However, given the hash it is extremely difficult to compute the initial 
message.26 This means that I can publicly share the hash function of a certain message or text 
while, at the same time, ensuring the secrecy of the underlying message.  
These characteristics of hashes ha ve fostered their implementation in several fields where 
guaranteeing data integrity is crucial. One that is familiar to legal scholars is computer forensics. 27 
There hashes are used as digital seals to guarantee the integrity of seized data. If the police want s 
to seize a digital document, it first computes its hash. This way, by solely checking the hash, anyone 
can verify whether the underlying document has been modified while in police custody. This 
method also allows the police or the prosecutor to share with  the defence the metadata that 
guarantees the integrity of the document – i.e., the hash – without having to disclose its content – 
thanks to hashes irreversibility.  
Let’s see, then, how this is applied when it comes to blockchain. As previously stated, encoded 
within each block of the chain is the hash of the previous block. The same goes for each block up 
to the first one – the so-called genesis block.28 This means that any modification in the content of 
any part of the chain would impact its hash and, automatically, the hashes of all those that follow 
the tampered one in the chain. A change in the content of any block would, thus, be displayed in 
the hash of each block following the affected one – including the last in the chain – making any 
attempt to tamper blockchain’s content immediately apparent to the whole network.  
Not only are the blocks necessarily interlinked through the respective hashes, but the same also 
goes for the data they contain. A precondition to having a new string of data added to the 
blockchain is that this must be consistent with the data present in the previous blocks. Each 
transaction of the blockchain is interlinked with a previous transaction recorded in a previous 
block allowing to follow that specific transaction trail up to its source.29 
 
26 M. Finck, Blockchains and data protection in the European Union, cit., 19. 
27  G. Ranganathan - X. Fernando – S. Fuqian, Inventive Communication and Computational Technologies, Springer, 
2021. 
28 A. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin. Programming the Open Blockchain, cit., glossary, blockchain. 
29 S. Hughes, ‘ Gatekeepers' Are Vital Participants in Anti -Money-Laundering Laws and Enforcement Regimes As 
Permission-less Blockchain-Based Transactions Pose Challenges to Current Means to'Follow the Money' i n Indiana Legal 
Studies Research Paper, 408, 2019, 5. 
 64 
To summarize, data in the blockchain is stored in interlinked and logically consequential blocks 
connected through hashes that create an append-only, and tamper-proof database.30 
To help in visualizing this storage model, we could describe it as a series of non -modifiable and 
inextricably linked PDF files. Each of these PDFs contains a fixed amount of information – that 
must be consistent with the information contained in the preceding files – as well as a hash of the 
previous PDF. Any modification in the content of any file in the chain will alter all the subsequent 
files and will, hence, be displayed in the last file of the chain.  
 
3.2 The storage of the ledger 
 
Just describing how data is stored in the blocks is not enough to comprehend the structure of the 
blockchain record -keeping mechanism. What we are still missing is the distributed nature of 
blockchain.  
Keep in mind, this section only delves into the static aspect of blockchain decentralization – i.e., 
how the information is stored, and integrity preserved. The dynamic element will be the object of 
the next section where we will analyse consensus protocols.  
What makes blockchain decentralized is how its ledger – meaning the aforementioned chain of 
interlinked blocks – is stored. Rather than entrusting the ledger to a single party, as in the pre-
existing system – the blockchain distributes control among all the participants of the network .31 
Each node of the network holds an identical copy of the blockchain and has full access to the data.  
This model eliminates the traditional framework rooted in a central point of control: in the 
blockchain, all the nodes are in a condition of perfect information symmetry. The lack of a central 
repository enhances the cyber resilience of the system as it eliminates the central point of failure.32 
 
30 C. Pelker Alden – C. Brown – R. Tucker, Using Blockchain Analysis from Investigation to Trial , cit., 74; A. 
Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, taxonomy and open challenges, cit., 1. 
31 D. Boreiko – G. Ferrarini – P. Giudici, Blockchain startups and prospectus regulation, cit., 668. 
32 I. Karasek -Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering instruments and European data protection 
requirements in permissionless blockchain space, cit., 18. 
 65 
As all the nodes are equally in control of the ledger, as long as one node of the blockchain remains 
online the network can still function. At the same time, this storage model means that, while the 
infrastructure is resilient to attacks that aim at disabling it, the information stored in the ledger is 
transparent. Eminently, anyone can become a node and get full access to the data stored in the 
ledger.33  
 
4. The Consensus protocol  
 
Having described the static element of blockchain’s record -keeping model, it is now necessary to 
delve into its dynamic dimension to explain what is, arguably, the most ingenious and contentious 
innovation of blockchain: the establishment of consensus rega rding the state of a shared ledger 
among non-reciprocally trusting parties.34 
In his seminal paper, Bitcoin: A Peer -to-Peer Electronic Cash System,35 Nakamoto identified the 
reliance on trusted third parties as the main setback of online commercial transactions. To solve 
this problem, he proposed an “electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of trust”.36 This 
idea that the blockchain substituted the need for trust with computer code became one of the 
recurring themes in the (pro)crypto debate. So much so that the concept was rephrased as “in code 
we trust” 37, the (un)official motto of the crypto movement. But what is behind this motto, and 
how does the blockchain create shared trust? To answer this question, we need to analyse the 
dynamic element of blockchain record-keeping and understand how new information is added to 
the shared ledger.  
 
33 M. Nadler – F. Schär, Tornado Cash and Blockchain Privacy: A Primer for Economists and Policymakers , Federal 
Reserve Bank of Saint Louis, 2023, 1; H. Axelsen – R. Omri, How Should DAOs be Regulated? A New Perspective 
on Decentralization , in AMPLIFY, 35/10, 2022, 2; H. Axelsen – J. Jensen – R. Omri, When is a DAO 
Decentralized?, cit., 53; US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance , cit., 
32. 
34 The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 26. 
35 S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System, cit. 
36 M. Nofer, et al. Blockchain in Business & Information Systems Engineering ,59/3, 2017, 183. 
37 The motto rephrases the United States of America’s motto “in god we trust” that is also engraved in the 
US dollar, the currency Bitcoin aims at substituting. 
 66 
In traditional record-keeping mechanisms, as the ledger is centrally held by the intermediary which 
retains full control over the latter, it is up to this entity to decide when and how to update it. They 
are the only one s that can add, modify, or delete information. This system, hence, requires users 
to trust that the intermediary will behave with integrity and not maliciously modify the content of 
the ledger. One of the main goals of the blockchain is to eliminate such a need for trust bypassing 
this entity:38 in the blockchain, there is no intermediary with full control of the ledger, as the latter 
is contemporarily stored by each node .39 This also means there is no entity that has the power to  
unilaterally modify it. This, however, creates a problem. If in the traditional model , it is the 
intermediary that retains the authority to dictate the state of the ledger, in a shared environment 
no one has such unilateral power.40 
So how is the ledger updated and who decides which information is valid? 
This is done through a so-called consensus protocol. A consensus protocol can be understood as 
a digital version of a social contract :41 as the parties of the network are non -reciprocally trusting, 
they draw a fundamental law laying down how new information is added, under which conditions, 
and by whom. This law aims to create a series of incentives and procedures that ensure the integrity 
of the ledger by guaranteeing that malicious actors cannot bend it to their advantage. This law is 
directly engraved into the source code of the blockchain and everyone entering the network 
acknowledges and (implicitly) accepts this as the fundamental law of the (digital) land.  
 
38 E. Budish, The Economic Limits of Bitcoin and Anonymous, Decentralized Trust on the Blockchain, cit., 7; K. Fatjon 
– E. Martino – A. M. Pacces, fintech and The Law and Economics of Disintermediation, cit., 7; O. Fliche – J. Uri – 
M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 27. 
39 M. Finck, Blockchains and data protection in the European Union, cit., 19.  
40 P. Bains, Blockchain consensus mechanisms: A primer for supervisors, International Monetary Fund, 2022, 5, “ in 
a centralized single-ledger system, a coordinating actor can make unilateral decisions and ensure a consistent ledger; this actor 
can read, write, and audit the system unilaterally. In decentralized systems, distributed nodes need to come to agreements, or a 
consensus, as there is no central authority to assume responsibility”.  
41 See, T. Hobbes, The Leviathan, London, 1651, 103 “ The final cause, end, or design of men (who naturally love 
liberty, and dominion over others) in the introduction of that restraint upon themselves, in which we see them live in 
Commonwealths, is the foresight of their own preservation, and of a more contented life thereby; that is to say, of getting 
themselves out from that miserable condition of war which is necessarily consequent, as hath been shown, to the natural passions 
of men when there is no visible power to keep them in awe, and tie them by fear of punishment to the performance of their 
covenants”; J. Rousseau, Du Contrat Social, ou principes du droit politique in Collection Complète des Oeuvres, Geneva, 
1789, 189, “lʼordre social est un droit sacré, qui sert de base à tous les autres. Cependant ce droit ne vient point de la nature; 
il est donc fondé sur des convention”. 
 67 
To sum up, the consensus protocol is the mechanism, expressed in computer code, that dictates 
how a blockchain network reaches an agreement regarding which new information can be validly 
added to the ledger and who has the power to do so.42  
As it happens with fundamental laws there is no one size fits all. Different blockchains adopt 
different consensus protocols depending on the values and functions they favour.43 This is not the 
place to delve into all the consensus protocols as this is a highly technical and continuously 
changing field. We will rather take as an example one consensus protocol to facilitate the reader’s 
understanding of blockchain’s dynamic functioning.  
The protocol we will describe is Proof of Work (PoW). This is the primordial model, first designed, 
like many other pieces of blockchain technology, years before the introduction of blockchain. It is 
the consensus protocol adopted by Bitcoin and by most major blockchain networks.44  
The PoW protocol introduces a mechanism to decide which of the participants of the network 
has, each time, the right to add the latest block of the chain. To do so it establishes a framework 
that requires participants – so-called miners – to compete45 and establishes a reward – so-called 
blockreward46 – for the one that wins this competition and is, hence, granted the right to add a 
new block.47 Essentially, once a certain number of new transactions has been broadcast ed to the 
network by users, miners compete for the right of adding the new block. First, a fixed number of 
transactions chosen by the miner from those awaiting confirmation are  compiled to create a 
“candidate block”. Then, miners devote computer resources to crack a mathematical puzzle that 
 
42 As defined by A. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin. Programming the Open Blockchain, cit., glossary, “Consensus 
rules: The block validation rules that full nodes follow to stay in consensus with other nodes”. 
43 For an overview of the main consensus protocols see P. Bains, Blockchain consensus mechanisms: A primer for 
supervisors, cit.; see also the discussion by The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, 
cit., 28 – 29. 
44 A. Porat – P. Avneesh – P. Shah – V. Adkar , Blockchain Consensus : An analysis of Proof -of-Work and its 
applications, 2017; R. Houben, Robby – A. Snyers, Cryptocurrencies and blockchain. Legal context and implications 
for financial crime, money laundering and tax evasion, cit., 18. PoW was also the consensus protocol adopted, until 
recently, by Ethereum which has now shifted to a Proof of Stake (PoS) protocol. 
45 A. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin. Programming the Open Blockchain, cit., 1, 229; The law society, Blockchain: 
Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 29. 
46 A. Trozze, et al., Cryptocurrencies and future financial crime, cit., 2, “Miners are rewarded for their work—at the time 
of writing, the reward for finding a correct block is 6.25 Bitcoin. These 6.25 Bitcoin are created and enter circulation once the 
miner finds a block, through what is called a ‘coinbase’ transaction (until the  maximum amount of Bitcoin, as specified in 
Nakamoto’s paper—21 million—are minted). The reward is halved approximately every 4 years”. 
47 P. Bains, Blockchain consensus mechanisms: A primer for supervisors , cit., 9; A. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin. 
Programming the Open Blockchain , cit., 27; A. Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, 
taxonomy and open challenges, cit., 1. 
 68 
can only be solved through guessing – through a so-called brute force attack.48 The computer that 
first guesses the right answer is granted the right to add the new block and is dispensed the attached 
reward49 – in the case of Bitcoin a fixed amount of newly minted coins. 50 The winning miner 
broadcasts the new block with the solution to the mathematical puzzle to the whole network so 
that each node can add the new block to their ledger and verify the consistency of the newly added 
transactions to their previous record.51 
The reasons why PoW is a safe and reliable mechanism are multiple and still debated.  
A first computer science argument is that Proof of Work requires miners to devote large resources 
to create new blocks. This means that, to take control of the network, a miner would need to 
devote huge resources as it would need to control fifty-one percent of the computing power of 
the network –launching a so -called fifty-one percent attack .52 Only in this way could a miner 
consistently control the outcome of the mining competition and modify at will the content of the 
blockchain. Further, to change past information, given the interlinked nature of the blocks, an 
attacker would need to redo the PoW for that block and each subsequent block making such an 
attack extremely costly.53  
A second social engineering argument 54 is that miners, to be competitive, need to invest large 
resources. These investments are rewarded with a payment by the network and/or the users in the 
connected crypto-asset. This means that miners have skin in the game when it comes to the price 
and existence of that specific crypto-asset. If a miner cheats the system and breaks the consensus 
mechanism, they challenge the validity of the fundamental law of the network and, in so doing, 
 
48 E. Budish, The Economic Limits of Bitcoin and Anonymous, Decentralized Trust on the Blockchain, cit., 8. 
49 A. Porat – P. Avneesh – P. Shah – V. Adkar , Blockchain Consensus : An analysis of Proof -of-Work and its 
applications, cit., 2; D. Carlisle, Virtual currencies and financial crime: Challenges and opportunities, cit., 4.   
50 C. Rueckert, Cryptocurrencies and fundamental rights, cit., 3. 
51 C. Pelker Alden – C. Brown – R. Tucker, Using Blockchain Analysis from Investigation to Trial, cit., 90. 
52 A. Porat – P. Avneesh – P. Shah – V. Adkar , Blockchain Consensus : An analysis of Proof -of-Work and its 
applications, cit., 6; A. Trozze, et al., Cryptocurrencies and future financial crime , in Crime Science, cit., 3. This 
argument has been the object of numerous criticisms. The most known is certainly the one advanced by 
two researchers from Cornell that proved that through a process they labelled “selfish mining” to tamper 
the blockchain it is needed a share much lower than 51 percent, see E. Ittay – E. Gün Sirer, Majority is not 
enough: Bitcoin mining is vulnerable in International conference on financial cryptography and data security, cit. 
53 The cost of the attack augments the “older” is the block. Namely, changing a very old block requires 
huge computing power as it would imply that all subsequent blocks would need to be modified and their 
PoW redone. For this reason, it is conventionally st ated that a block becomes unmodifiable after six 
confirmations, A. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin. Programming the Open Blockchain, cit., 28. 
54 E. Budish, The Economic Limits of Bitcoin and Anonymous, Decentralized Trust on the Blockchain ,cit. 
 69 
imperil the existence of the network itself. It is, thus, argued that it is more rational for a miner to 
act honestly than not .55 This statement is reinforced by the structure of modern mining. As 
mentioned in the previous chapter, the growing competition in the market implies that this activity 
does not only require short -term investments – such as electricity – but also long-term ones – as 
hardware specifically designed for mining. These investments increase the cost of cheating, as the 
cost and time to divest are extended, nudging individuals towards compliance.56  
Whatever the technical explanation, it is a fact that PoW has proven to be a very reliable system . 
As it has sustained the development of multi-billion endeavours as Bitcoin or Ethereum for more 
than a decade now. However, it also presents severe drawbacks. In particular, the competition 
among miners means that an action which, in a centralized database, is generally cheap in terms of 
time and cost – i.e., updating the ledger – becomes resource intensive due to the absence of a 
designated trust intermediary.57 
These hindrances have pushed toward the invention of new consensus mechanisms and even new 
forms of blockchain that try to address the setbacks of PoW. One of these solutions will be 
addressed in section seven where we will delve into permissioned blockchains. 
 
5. The transaction model. Asymmetric cryptography  
 
Until now we have described how information in the blockchain is stored  and added, it is now 
time to add the final piece to our brief overview of this technology and delve into the way 
transactions are executed among users. 
To understand blockchain’s transaction model it is first necessary to briefly introduce asymmetric 
cryptography, the technique underlying blockchain’s accounts and privacy structure. Cryptography 
 
55 E. Budish, The Economic Limits of Bitcoin and Anonymous, Decentralized Trust on the Blockchain, cit., 26. 
56 E. Budish, The Economic Limits of Bitcoin and Anonymous, Decentralized Trust on the Blockchain, cit., 29. 
57 As mentioned in the previous chapter Bitcoin mining currently consumes more energy than Sweden. For 
this and other information and statistics regarding Bitcoin’s energy consumption see the Cambridge Bitcoin 
Electricity Consumption Index compiled by the Un iversity of Cambridge, 
https://ccaf.io/cbeci/index/comparisons 
 70 
– from the Greek kryptos, meaning hidden – is the field that studies and develops solutions to 
guarantee the security of information.58  
Now, how do you do that?  
The easiest answer is through the encryption of the information that you wish to protect. 
Encrypting means transforming a text written in plain language into one whose meaning can only 
be understood by those who hold the decryption key.  
An example may facilitate the understanding. One of the simplest encryption techniques is the 
Caesar cipher,59 named after the famous Roman general and politician Julius Caesar. When Julius 
Caesar needed to send a message to his generals, to avoid that the interception of the messenger 
may compromise his plans, he would encrypt his texts through a substitution c ipher. This means 
that he would replace each letter in the original text with a different letter placed at a fixed distance. 
For example, if the cipher uses a left shift of two, the A is replaced with the C, the B with the D, 
the C with the E, and so forth. With this c ipher the word “hello” would become “jgnnq”. While 
this is a very basic encryption technique, the main concept we need for our explanation is already 
there: to encrypt and decrypt a message the two communicating parties need to hold the same 
encryption key. Caesar and his generals needed to agree on the measure – one, two, three, … - and 
the direction – left, right – of the shift. Otherwise, they would have not been able to understand 
their respective messages. This creates a vulnerability: anyone who has access to the key can read 
the messages. Thus, the parties must find a way to securely store and communicate the key at the 
risk of seeing their efforts to maintain the secrecy of their communications nullified.60 
With the introduction of digital communications, as an increasing chunk of information flows 
shifted online, the need for encryption has multiplied.61 This growth, paired with the commonplace 
nature of long -distance communications in digital environments, has magnified the relevance of 
the abovementioned vulnerability. Eminently, the classic means to safely communicate the 
decryption key is for the part ies to physically meet. If the parties were to use any other non -
encrypted long-distance means of communication to share the key, the risk is to be intercepted, 
 
58 Or as defined by D. Luciano – G. Prichett, Cryptology: From Caesar ciphers to public -key cryptosystems in The 
College Mathematics Journal, 18/1, 1987, 2, cryptography “is the art and science of making communications unintelligible 
to all except the intended recipients”. 
59 See D. Luciano – G. Prichett, Cryptology: From Caesar ciphers to public-key cryptosystems, cit., 2. 
60 N. Szabo, Smart Contracts: Building Blocks for Digital Markets, 1996. 
61 D. Luciano – G. Prichett, Cryptology: From Caesar ciphers to public-key cryptosystems, cit., 1. 
 71 
this way compromising the safety of all future communications. In a world where non -physical 
communication is the norm, the need to physically meet to exchange the key was a crucial 
drawback.62 This led to extensive research aimed at developing a solution that would eliminate the 
need for the communicating parties to share a common key. 
 The result of this effort is asymmetric cryptography. Asymmetric cryptography allows two parties 
to securely communicate without having to share a common encryption key.63  
Let’s see how this works.  
In asymmetric cryptography, each party has two connected keys: a public key and a private key. 
The public key can be freely shared publicly, while the private key must remain secret to guarantee 
the safety of communications. Asymmetric cryptography breaks into two the traditional key, one 
– the public key – can be used only for the encryption of the message, and one – the private key 
– only for its decryption. The two keys are linked as the public key is computed from the private 
key through a process that cannot be reversed, i.e. hashing – meaning that, knowing the private 
key, the public key can be easily computed, but, knowing the public key, it is (virtually) impossible 
to reverse compute the private key .64 This makes secure communications easier as all I need to 
know to send an encrypted message is the public key of my addressee, which they can securely 
share. If I want to send an encrypted message, I will ask my addressee to share with me their public 
key. I will use that public key to encrypt the message and then send it to them. Once received, the 
addressee will use their private key to decrypt the message without either of us needing to know 
the other’s private key.65 
 
62 P. Anderson, Cypherpunk ethics. Radical ethics for the digital age, cit., 19, “electronic communication from the telegraph 
to the internet introduced a new problem for cryptographers: Is it possible to share encryption keys without ever meeting in 
person?”. 
63 P. Anderson, Cypherpunk ethics. Radical ethics for the digital age, cit., 20; The law society, Blockchain: Legal and 
regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 26. 
64 A. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin. Programming the Open Blockchain , cit., 56; The law society, Blockchain: 
Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 26. 
65 N. Szabo, Smart Contracts: Building Blocks for Digital Markets, cit., “Alice generates two keys, called the private and 
public keys. She keeps the private key secret and well protected, and publishes the public key. When Bob wishes to send a 
message to Alice, he encrypts a message with her public key, sends the encrypted message, and she decrypts the message with her 
private key. The private key provides a "trapdoor" that allows Alice to compute an easy inverse of the encryption function that 
used the public key. The public key provides no clue as to what the private key is, even though they are mathematically related”; 
The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 26. 
 72 
While the primordial function of asymmetric cryptography is secure communications, this 
technique can also be used for a second purpose: to guarantee the source of a certain message – 
i.e., as a digital signature.66 Namely, given the relation existing between private and public keys, the 
private key can be used to generate a signature – different each time – which can be then validated 
by any third party through the public key. This way an individual can use his priv ate key to sign a 
document/transaction, they will then share their public key with any other interested parties who 
will be able to verify that the signature was executed through the private key associated with that 
specific public key and, thus, by the individual holding it.  
This system has been implemented in blockchain ecosystems to guarantee the integrity of the 
transactions while maintaining full decentralization. Let’s see how. 
In blockchain ecosystems, anyone can create an account by simply generating a private key and 
from that computing the public key .67 This eliminates the need for an intermediary providing for 
an address/account. The private key can be computed by anyone through different methods – 
including flipping a coin 256 times.68 If the user, then, wants to send all or a share of their crypto-
assets all they need to know is their addressee’s address (which is computed hashing their public 
key) and the addressor’s private key. They will, then, generate a transaction – meaning a string of 
data – stating the amount they wish to send, their addressee’s address, and their digital signature – 
generated through their private key .69 They will, subsequently, broadcast the transaction to the 
network, where miners will compile it into a block and, after having verified its consistency with 
the previous blocks – meaning the addresser has the amount they want to transfer, the signature 
is valid, and the public key of the addressee is valid – add it to the chain.70  
 
66 N. Szabo, Smart Contracts: Building Blocks for Digital Markets, cit. 
67 For a series of examples of how Bitcoin transactions work see A. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin. 
Programming the Open Blockchain , cit., 9 - 11; The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third 
Edition, cit., 26. 
68 For a detailed explanation on how to create a private key see A. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin. 
Programming the Open Blockchain, cit., 58; The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, 
cit., 26. 
69 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual Currencies, cit., 40; R. Houben, – A. 
Snyers, Cryptocurrencies and blockchain. Legal context and implications for financial crime, money laundering and tax 
evasion, European Parliament, 2018, 17; European Banking Authority, Report on Crypto-assets, cit., 8; The law 
society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 26; M. Finck, Blockchains and data protection in 
the European Union, cit., 19. 
70 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk -based approach. Virtual Currencies, cit., 41 – 43; European 
Banking Authority, Report with Advice for the European Commission on Crypto ‐assets, Paris, 2019, 8; C. Pelker 
 73 
 
6. Privacy within the blockchain. Pseudonymity or anonymity? 
 
Simply reading the preceding sections you may have the feeling that blockchain is a very 
transparent form of value exchange. Each transaction bears the identifier of the addresser – their 
digital signature – and the addressee – their crypto-asset address. All the transactions are stored in 
a consequential manner so that the money trail is immediately apparent. The ledger is public; hence, 
anyone can download it and check how much money a certain address has, to who m they have 
sent it, and from whom they have received it.71  
Going back to our previous chapter, this begs the question, weren’t cryptocurrencies envisioned 
as a system to guarantee individual privacy?  
Yes, they are, and to understand how we need to focus on blockchain’s key characteristic: 
disintermediation.72 Blockchain’s disintermediation of control means that there is no entry or exit 
checkpoint. Anyone can create as many blockchain accounts as they wish without ever needing to 
identify themselves.73 Just toss a coin 256 times and you will have a functioning Bitcoin private 
key; from that private key, you can compute the public key  and crypto-assets address and start 
using your account. 
The address will guarantee it is you – meaning the person that has access to the related private key 
– who is acting but it will not say anything regarding your identity. A n address is simply an 
alphanumeric string that bears no information regarding the person that controls it .74 Due to this 
 
Alden – C. Brown – R. Tucker, Using Blockchain Analysis from Investigation to Trial , cit., 60; The law society, 
Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 26. 
71 C. Leuprecht - C. Jenkins – R. Hamilton, Virtual money laundering: policy implications of the proliferation in the 
illicit use of cryptocurrency, cit., 4; T. Frick, Virtual and cryptocurrencies—regulatory and anti-money laundering approaches 
in the European Union and in Switzerland , in Era Forum, 20/1, 2019, 100; US Department of Treasury, Illicit 
Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 32. 
72 A. Blandin, et al., Global cryptoasset regulatory landscape study, cit., 26. 
73 A. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin. Programming the Open Blockchain, cit., 11; O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, 
“Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 26. 
74 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
Paris, 2019, 27, “the information available on the blockchain or other type of distributed ledger may enable relevant authorities 
to trace transactions back to a wallet address, though may not readily link the wallet address to the name of an individual. 
 74 
privacy structure, cryptocurrencies are usually branded as pseudonymous:75 everyone can see what 
a certain address is doing but no one knows who is hiding behind it.76  
At the same time, the blockchain’s privacy structure means that, if a n address is deanonymized, 
the whole transaction history of the individual becomes accessible to anyone.77  
As stated by UCL professor and blockchain forensic expert Sarah Meiklejohn: 
“If you catch a dealer with drugs and cash on the street, you've caught them committing one crime but if you catch 
people using something like Silk Road, you've uncovered their whole criminal history (...) it's like discovering their 
books” .78 
This is since, contrarily to traditional record -keeping systems, blockchain is logically centralized. 
All the information is stored in a single ledger which means that rebuilding the transaction trail is 
extremely easy once an address is deanonymized.  
At the same time, the decentralized nature of blockchain adds an additional layer of privacy. As 
anyone can create, without any cost and without having to identify, as many accounts as they wish, 
a user could, theoretically, employ a different address for each transaction. 79 This severely 
diminishes the usefulness of deanonymizing a public key as it only links the person to a single 
transaction.80 
 
The wallet address contains a user code that serves as a digital signature in the distributed ledger (i.e., a private key) in  the 
form of a unique string of numbers and letters. However, additional information will be necessary to associate the address to a 
real or natural person”. 
75 A. Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, taxonomy and open challenges , cit., 5; C. 
Rueckert, Cryptocurrencies and fundamental rights, cit., 3. 
76 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 26; M. 
Campbell-Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global anti-money laundering governance, in Crime, Law and Social Change, 
69, 2018, 286 – 287. 
77 M. Nadler – F. Schär, Tornado Cash and Blockchain Privacy: A Primer for Economists and Policymakers, cit., 1, “If 
someone obtains information that allows them to link a blockchain address to an entity, they may effectively observe that entity’s 
entire transaction history and associated activity ”; M. Harlev, et al., Breaking bad: De -anonymising entity types on the 
bitcoin blockchain using supervised machine learning, in Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, 2018, 3499. 
78 J. Bohannon, The bitcoin bust  in Science, 351, 2016, 1144; on this point see also A. Trozze, et al., 
Cryptocurrencies and future financial crime, in Crime Science, 11, 2022, 2. 
79 M. Harlev, et al., Breaking bad: De-anonymising entity types on the bitcoin blockchain using supervised machine learning, 
cit., 3499; C. Rueckert, Cryptocurrencies and fundamental rights, cit., 3. 
80 We will further explore how blockchain addresses can be linked and their activity analysed in chapter 4 
section 6 on blockchain analytics. 
 75 
It is relevant to underline the paradox of this privacy structure. If the user does not access the 
market in a decentralized fashion but through an intermediary that they then use to manage their 
finances – as it currently happens in most cases – blockchain is much less private than the 
traditional forms of financial transaction. Namely, if the pseudonymity guaranteed by 
decentralization is bypassed, the blockchain ledger is more complete and inte lligible compared 
with the private and fragmented ledgers of financial institutions.81  
To conclude, blockchain’s privacy structure is fundamentally rooted in its decentralization which 
allows users to create as many accounts as they wish without having to provide any information 
that can be used to identify them. 82 At the same time, blockchain’s transparency means that if 
deanonymization does happen the transaction trail is more accessible and complete compared to 
the traditional system.  
 
7. A key distinction: permissioned and permissionless blockchains  
 
What we have described up to this point is the primordial model of blockchain. However, since 
2008, not only have blockchain’s possible use-cases multiplied, but the technology itself has 
morphed and forked.  
As states and corporations have started exploring possible use -cases, the technology they 
envisioned became substantially different compared to the original model.83 Such blockchain loses 
some elements of decentralization, especially in terms of governance and transparency, to 
guarantee greater control and privacy.84 Indeed, most corporate and state-led pilots employ private, 
 
81 M. Campbell-Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global anti-money laundering governance, cit., 298, “The paradox of 
blockchain technology is therefore that while AML efforts must deal with imperfect knowledge of identities, they may exploit 
perfect knowledge of all transactions ”; The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 
91. 
82 C. Akcora et al., How to not get caught when you launder money on blockchain?, arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15082, 
2020, 1. 
83 The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 36. 
84 P. De Filippi - A. Wright, Blockchain and the law. The rule of code, cit., 31; Banca d’Italia, Comunicazione della 
Banca d’Italia in materia di tecnologie decentralizzate nella finanza e cripto-attività, cit., 7. 
 76 
permissioned blockchains85 contrary to the public, permissionless one typical of Bitcoin and most 
cryptocurrencies.86 
This second type of blockchain has seen a marked development in the last years as a tempered 
form of blockchain. Indeed, contrary to the fully decentralized blockchain of Bitcoin, which grants 
no central control in terms of access or governance, permission ed, private blockchains ensure a 
customizable level of centralization.87 These allow the establishment of a centre of governance that 
can decide – depending on the design – who can join the network, who can read and write in the 
blockchain, etc.88 The, at least partial, recentralization of control makes these types of systems 
more appealing to public actors. A certain level of centralization is fundamental to permit the 
implementation of blockchain as a means to pursue public or semi-public functions.89  
This is for two main reasons.  
First, excessive transparency of the information stored in the blockchain could be considered a 
liability for companies and public players  in terms of governance and privacy . Eminently, while 
decentralization guarantees prompt sharing of robust information, this does not mean that 
information bearers are open to completely losing control of their information .90 Furthermore, a 
certain level of privacy and control over data is required by imperative privacy regulations. Private 
and public entities not only wish but must maintain a certain level of control over the information 
 
85 The term private and permissioned are sometimes used together, as in the present section, to jointly 
identify a network that has a mechanism of centralized governance. Other times, they are used separately 
to identify different characteristics of this gov ernance structure. When used separately, a permissioned 
network identifies one where only authorized actors can validate and add new information and a private 
network is one where only certain user can access the information in the ledger, see P. Bains, Blockchain 
consensus mechanisms: A primer for supervisors, cit., 4; R. Houben, Robby – A. Snyers, Cryptocurrencies and 
blockchain. Legal context and implications for financial crime, money laundering and tax evasion, cit., 15. 
86 A. D’amelio – G. Soana, Blockchain technology to prevent tax frauds and money laundering in the European Customs 
Union: quo vadis?, in Dirittto e Pratica Tributaria Internazionale , 2021, 1035; P. Jayachandran, The difference 
between public and private blockchain, in Blockchain Pulse: IBM Blockchain Blog, 
https://www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/2017/05/the-difference-between-public-and-private-
blockchain/  
87 S. Hughes, ‘ Gatekeepers' Are Vital Participants in Anti -Money-Laundering Laws and Enforcement Regimes As 
Permission-less Blockchain-Based Transactions Pose Challenges to Current Means to'Follow the Money', cit., 6. 
88 R. Auer Embedded Supervision: How to build regulation in decentralized finance, cit., 4; The law society, Blockchain: 
Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 37. 
89 A. D’amelio – G. Soana, Blockchain technology to prevent tax frauds and money laundering, cit., 1036. 
90 R. Campbell et al., Distributed Ledger Technologies in the Public Sector: Learnings on the application of Distributed 
Ledger Technologies across international public services and their role in realising Scotland’s full potential in a digital w orld, 
The Scottish Government, 2018, 22; C. Mohan, State of public and private blockchains: Myths and reality , in 
Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management of Data, 2019, 1. 
 77 
they share. This entails that the sharing of sensitive data has to always occur among trusted parties 
that guarantee compliance with relevant regulations and avoid unwanted publicity. Private, 
permissioned blockchains, by only granting access to authorized actors and allowing to customize 
such access, guarantee this control.  
Second, a certain oversight over the governance of these systems is necessary and, in many cases, 
legally mandated .91 The fully decentralized governance that characterizes crypto -assets collides 
with the centralization underlying our political and economic institutions.  
Hence, to foster the implementation of blockchain by these players, it is crucial to ensure a certain 
level of centralized governance. Private, permissioned blockchains permit this control by enabling 
the governing body to decide who can become a node and who can gain access to the blockchain 
in terms of reading and writing.92  
This partial recentralization of governance also impacts  blockchain’s efficiency. Due to the pre -
existing (relative) trust among the participants in a permissioned network – as all participants are 
identified – the consensus protocol is collaborative rather than competitive, making the update of 
the ledger less energy intensive and more efficient. The consensus protocol employed by private 
blockchain is, most of the time, Proof of Authority (PoA). PoA resembles closely the traditional 
update system, as it identifies certain nodes that have the authority to unilaterally update the ledger. 
This protocol eliminates the energy-intensive competition among miners typical of Proof of Work 
but also erodes the trustless and decentralized nature of blockchain as centralized authorities are 
re-established.  
The centralized control permitted by permissioned blockchain underlines a genetic change in this 
field. The main innovation purported by Satoshi Nakamoto in his seminal paper was the 
introduction of a reliable system of payment among non -reciprocally trust ing parties. When it 
comes to private, permissioned blockchains the logic changes. Here, nodes are only known players 
 
91 See the example of custom management in A. D’amelio – G. Soana, Blockchain technology to prevent tax frauds 
and money laundering in the European Customs Union: quo vadis?, cit.; C. Kuner – F. Cate – O. Lynskey – C. 
Millard – N. Ni Loideain – D. Svantesson, Blockchain versus data protection in International Data Privacy Law, 2, 
2018, 103, on the need to introduce permissioned blockchain to ensure compliance with the data protection 
regulatory framework. 
92 C. Mohan, State of public and private blockchains: Myths and reality , cit., 2; K. Werbach, The blockchain and the 
new architecture of trust, cit., 107.  
 
 78 
that have been admitted to the network. There is, thus, a certain level of trust among them and 
the governance body. Blockchain’s decentralization plays a different role in these networks 
compared with the permissionless networks. The customizable decentra lization of control and 
access to the information augments trust among already trusting parties while ameliorating the 
quality and timeliness of data shared. At the same time, it provides a manageable level of 
automation as well as the establishment of common rules which application is overviewed by each 
party.93 
From a financial integrity perspective, this system is of great interest. Namely, in terms of 
monitoring, permissioned blockchains represent the best of both worlds. 94 As the pre-existing 
record-keeping system, they have a centralized governance structure. Thus, providing the regulator 
with a central point of pressure to police and on which to impose financial integrity obligations. 
As in the blockchain record -keeping system, information is logically centralized, meaning every 
interaction among the participants of the network is recorded in a single ledger. In these networks, 
the main question is, hence, how much control is desirable and not how much control is possible, 
given that the underlying architecture would allow for (virtually) perfect control. 
 
8. Smart contracts  
 
Now that we have completed the description of blockchain’s basic functioning, we need to add an 
additional layer to our analysis and examine how the blockchain impacts the execution of computer 
programs. 
 
93 The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 37, lists three main advantages 
of permissioned blockchains compared to legacy systems: Immutability, peer-to-peer exchanges, and digital 
signatures. 
94 On the suitability of private blockchains for compliance purposes see A. Minto, The legal characterization of 
crypto-exchange platforms, in Global Jurist, 22/1, 2021, 142 – 143. 
 79 
To do so, we must introduce the concept of smart contract s. This idea was first introduced by 
Nick Szabo – a computer scientist who would then move on to become one of the core members 
of the early Bitcoin community – in a paper he published in 1994.95  
In this text, he described smart contracts as: 
“a computerized transaction protocol that executes the terms of a contract. The general objectives of smart contract 
design are to satisfy common contractual conditions (such as payment terms, liens, confidentiality, and even 
enforcement), minimize exceptions both malicious and accidental, and minimize the need for trusted 
intermediaries”.96 
A textbook example of smart contract is the vending machine.97 If I want to buy a soda at a vending 
machine, I tap the number on the keypad, the machine tells me the price, I introduce the money 
and the machine dispenses me with the drink. This is a sale contract that is concluded and executed 
in a completely automatized and computerized fa shion without the need for any human 
intervention. 
The vending machine is a simplified example of a concept – the computerized conclusion, 
execution, and enforcement of contractual terms – that can be applied in nearly all fields. The 
rationale for the development of such contracts is to eliminate the human factor, in the execution 
and enforcement of legal obligations; through the substitution of sloppy, emotional humans with 
cold, predictable machines the proponents hoped would “lower fraud loss, arbitration and enforcement 
costs, and other transaction cost”.98 
Until blockchain was introduced, the main setback of smart contracts was that there was still the 
need to trust a human third party. Any computer software needs to be run on something and by 
someone. This  reintroduces the human factor in the equation and lower s the appeal of smart 
 
95 N. Szabo, Smart Contracts, 1994. M. Nadler – F. Schär, Tornado Cash and Blockchain Privacy: A Primer for 
Economists and Policymakers, cit., 3. 
96 N. Szabo, Smart Contracts, cit.; see also the definition of A. Porat – P. Avneesh – P. Shah – V. Adkar, 
Blockchain Consensus : An analysis of Proof-of-Work and its applications, cit., 4, “A smart contract is a computer program 
stored on the decentralized blockchain network that executes the terms defined inside of it. The contract only runs when it i s 
invoked to do so by an external event or if some predefined condition is met ”, and that provided by H. Axelsen – J. 
Jensen – R. Omri, When is a DAO Decentralized? , cit., 53, “ Smart contracts are scripts that automatically carry out 
specific business logic” 
97 This example can be found in N. Szabo, Smart Contracts: Building Blocks for Digital Markets, cit. 
98 N. Szabo, Smart Contracts, cit.; O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what 
regulatory response?, cit., 2. 
 80 
contracts. Blockchain promises to solve this problem through decentralized execution and trustless 
trust. Namely, in the same way as Bitcoin transactions are confirmed without anyone being able 
to unilaterally stop the process, smart contracts can be executed without anyone really being in 
command.99 Blockchain enables developers to compute a smart contract that, once launched, only 
obeys to the laws engrained in its code.100 
The main push for the development of these smart contracts came from the introduction of 
Ethereum in 2014 .101 With Ethereum, anyone can compute a smart contract and execute it in a 
fully decentralized way.102 This means that any algorithm – whether it bears the terms of a contract, 
the source code of a videogame or a regulation – can be executed in a decentralized and, thus, fully 
automatized fashion. Smart contracts comprise, hence, a much wider category than just contracts: 
they can be described as rules written in computer language and executed by a network of 
decentralized computers – meaning without anyone retaining unilateral control over their 
execution.103  
 
99 H. Axelsen – R. Omri, How Should DAOs be Regulated? A New Perspective on Decentralization, cit., 2, “The key 
difference from a regular agreement is that the blockchain itself executes the code automatically. This, in turn, means that once 
a smart contract is deployed, no human engagement is required to complete the transactions or other business logic den oted by 
the contract code (…) This means that once deployed; the smart contract will execute for as long as the version of the blockchain 
exists; it cannot be turned off ”, K. Fatjon – E. Martino – A. M. Pacces, fintech and The Law and Economics of 
Disintermediation, cit., 14. 
100 M. Finck, Blockchain regulation and governance in Europe, Cambridge University Press, 2018, 67-68; A. Trozze, 
et al., Cryptocurrencies and future financial crime, in Crime Science, cit., 3, “computer programmes that automatically execute 
contracts, in the form of if-else statements (e.g., if a product is received, then release the funds. The smart contract code is publicly 
visible on the blockchain and immutable. Smart contracts allow parties to enter contracts without needing to trust one another, 
or a third party, for execution. Rather, the parties can be confident that the contract will be carried out as agreed, so lon g as 
they trust its code ”; O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory 
response?, cit., 7.  
101 M. Nofer, et al. Blockchain, cit., 185; D. Boreiko – G. Ferrarini – P. Giudici, Blockchain startups and prospectus 
regulation, cit., 669. 
102 M. Zou, Code, and other laws of blockchain , cit., 659, “ Blockchain-based smart contracts not only memorialise the 
details (all or parts) of an agreement between contracting parties in code, but also automate the execution and enforcement o f 
its terms on the distributed ledger, without an intermediary”; H. Axelsen – R. Omri, How Should DAOs be Regulated? 
A New Perspective on Decentralization, cit., 3. 
103 Many scholars have reflected on the impact blockchain based legal norms may have on the society and 
the law, see M. Finck, Blockchain regulation and governance in Europe, cit.; P. De Filippi – A. Wright, Blockchain 
and law. The rule of code, cit. 
 81 
Smart contracts are purported to reduce the need for trust and intermediaries – such as lawyers, 
courts, notaries, etc.104 – when it comes to (commercial) relations.105 From insurance contracts to 
complex organizations, blockchain enthusiasts assure that computers can replace humans by 
guarantying exact and timely execution. 
There are, however, three main obstacles on the road toward complete automation. 
First, the need to translate the wet code into dry code. In computer science lingo, the wet code 
identifies human-readable language, and dry code the machine -readable one.106 Computers need 
certainties, humans need nuances, especially when it comes to the regulation of their behaviour.107 
Contracts are filled with terms like good faith, best effort, etc. which are nearly impossible to 
translate into a machine -readable language. This creates a problem when it comes to translating 
complex legal documents – as the articles of incorporation of a company – into computer code. If 
simplification is always possible, certain nuances are necessary when it comes to establishing a 
long-term relationship among humans.  
Second, a smart contract may still need information from the outside world to correctly execute. 
An example will facilitate the understanding. Let’s imagine an insurance contract aimed at 
protecting a farmer from the risk of drought.108 The smart contract is written in the following way: 
if in 2022 it rains more than X, do not pay, if in 2022 it rains less than X, pay 50 ether 109 to the 
farmer. The contract is entrusted with a fund of 50 ether that it solely controls, so that, if option 
B happens, it can self -execute. Now the problem is, how does the contract know how much it 
rained? The contract will need a so-called oracle – meaning a source that feeds it with the requested 
 
104 As stated by N. Szabo, Smart Contracts: Building Blocks for Digital Markets , cit., “ Legal barriers are the most 
severe cost of doing business across many jurisdictions. Smart contracts can cut through this Gordian knot of jurisdictions. 
Where smart contracts can increase privity, they can decrease vulnerability to capricious jurisdictions . Where smart contracts 
can increase observability or verifiability, they can decrease dependence on these obscure local legal codes and enforcement 
traditions”. 
105 P. De Filippi – A. Wright, Blockchain and law. The rule of code, cit., 75. 
106 K. Fatjon – E. Martino – A. M. Pacces, fintech and The Law and Economics of Disintermediation, cit., 8, argue 
this translation process actually recreates the trust dilemma as the user needs to trust the coder to correctly 
and faithfully translate their wills. 
107 M. Finck, Blockchain regulation and governance in Europe, cit., 81. 
108 Insurance is seen as one of the fields where smart contracts and blockchain are more promising, see 
European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, Discussion paper on blockchain and smart contracts in 
insurance, Luxembourg, 2021. 
109 The ether is the native cryptocurrency of Ethereum, which is the most common platform when it comes 
to computing smart contracts, see https://ethereum.org/en/smart-contracts/.  
 82 
information.110 The oracle may be a sensor placed in the farmer’s land measuring rain or a weather 
website. Whatever that may be, the oracle reintroduces a degree of centralization in the contract . 
Eminently, it allows the parties to manipulate it, give rise to dispute, and block the execution of 
the contract.  
Third, machines are blind. Launching a self -executing, virtually unstoppable machine can be 
extremely dangerous as it will not be able to discern the nuances that are intrinsic to any human 
activity. The DAO hack, detailed in the previous chapter ,111 is a good example of this problem. 
The hacker that attacked the DAO formally did nothing wrong, it simply executed a command 
that was provided by the smart contract. The reason why the hacker’s actions were wrong entailed 
their intentions, which cannot be assessed by a smart contract that acts based on the binomial 
valid/invalid. The smart contract “voluntarily” paid the hacker and there was nothing that anyone 
could do to stop it. The only available solution was to recentralize  the network and reverse the 
transactions, which is what the community eventually did. This, however, reintroduced precisely 
the arbitrariness factor in contractual relations that they aimed at eliminating through smart 
contract-based commercial relations.  
 
 
110 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response? , cit., 21, 
“oracles- who import exogenous data flows into blockchains (it should be reminded that blockchains cannot access external 
databases). These oracles can be conventionally centralised entities, but they also can be decentralised applications, both from a 
governance perspective and in the way they collect information: volunteers are called upon to send data; the oracle synthesises the 
information provided into an average (that is usually weighted); the information providers are then remunerated according to 
how close they are to this average, which is deemed correct”. 
111 See chapter 1 section 3.2. 
 83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 84 
Chapter Three 
 
Tracing the Regulatory Corral 
An analysis of the object and subjects of the regulation: the 
definition of crypto-asset and crypto-asset service providers 
 
 
1. A brief introduction to the financial flows control strategy 
 
To understand the logic underlying the anti-money laundering regulation, it is first essential to 
grasp a historical shift occurred in the second half of the past century. One that has  profoundly 
modified the  structure of financial transactions : the progressive digitalization of the financial 
system. Namely, the digitalization of finance constitutes one of the architectural foundations of 
the anti-money laundering strategy. If, as detailed in chapter one, the introduction of Electronic 
Fund Transfer Systems (EFTS) sent chills down the spine of cypherpunks’ and crypto libertarians, 
it was, at the same time, a mouth-watering innovation for the criminal justice system.  
The shift from cash to digital currencies1 meant that the system moved from being token-based to 
account-based. This is a momentous shift in terms of financial monitoring. The fundamental 
difference between the two systems is the following.2 
 
1 The term digital currency is hereby used to identify the use of so-called commercial bank money, meaning 
the use of electronic fund transfer systems rooted in an intermediary (credit cards, debit cards, wire 
transfers, etc.) that holds the account and provides for the fund transfer system.  
2 For a brief discussion regarding the difference between these two systems see, C. Kahn – W. Roberds, 
Why pay? An introduction to payments economics, in Journal of Financial Intermediation, 18/1, 2009, 6 - 9. 
 85 
In token -based systems, the value is directly incorporated in the object exchanged. This 
incorporation of the value can be dictated by the market – due to its scarcity, as is the case with 
gold – or by order of the authority – as with fiat currencies.3 In a token -based system, when 
receiving a payment, the beneficiary only needs to check the validity of the token and has no 
interest in identifying their counterparty. This is because the value is received by the beneficiary 
through the simple act of entering in the possession of a valid – meaning non-counterfeited – 
token. In this sense, token -based systems are peer -to-peer. Eminently, the exchange of value is 
carried out directly between the two parties without the need for any third-party intervention.4  
In account-based systems, in contrast, the exchange of value is carried out through the reallocation 
of a claim the payer has with a third party – a bank, a credit card company, etc. – to the payee. In 
these systems, thus, the beneficiary needs to identify its counterparty to correctly execute the 
transaction. This for two reasons. First, as they need to check that the payer’s claim towards the 
third party is sufficient to honour the payment they intend to perform. Second, as they need to 
communicate to the debtor the shift in the titularity of the claim so that the former can update its 
ledger.5 An account-based system is, hence, not peer-to-peer. To carry out a payment, a third party 
has to be included. One that certifies the payer has the funds they intend to transfer and reallocates 
such funds to the payee.  
As clearly stated by Charles Kahn:6 
 
3 State currencies are commonly known as fiat. The term fiat comes from Latin, and it can be translated as 
“it shall be” signifying its relation with the order of the authority, see I. Asmundson – C. Oner, What is 
money?, in Finance & Development, 49/3, 2012, 
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2012/09/basics.htm  
4 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response? , cit., 43, 
defines a peer -to-peer system as  “An exchange model where each entity in the network is both client and server, as 
opposed to the client-server model. The terms "peer", "node" and "user" are generally used to designate the entities making up 
such a system. A peer -to-peer system can be pa rtially centralized (part of the exchange goes through a central intermediary 
server) or fully decentralised (connections are made between participants without any particular infrastructure)”; this privacy 
features of cash has made it one of the preferred means to launder illicit proceeds see the analysis of E.W. 
Kruisbergen - E.R. Leukfeldt - E.R. Kleemans - R.A. Roks, Money talks money laundering choices of organized 
crime offenders in a digital age, cit., 576. 
5 F. Tronnier - D. Harborth - P. Hamm, Investigating privacy concerns and trust in the digital Euro in Germany, cit., 
1, “All new and digital currencies or payment methods create and leave electronic records, which could be tracked and monitored 
to counteract money laundering or other illegal activities” 
6 C. Kahn, Tokens vs. Accounts: Why the Distinction Still Matters, Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis, 5 October 
2020, https://www.stlouisfed.org/on-the-economy/2020/october/tokens-accounts-why-distinction-
matters,  
 86 
“When you pay with an account, the crucial question for the recipient is your identity: “Are you really the account 
holder?”. When you pay with a token, your identity is irrelevant; instead, the crucial question for the recipient is: 
“Is this object I’m receiving real or counterfeit?”. 
This difference between token and account is crucial when it comes to the digitalization of financial 
transactions.  
The traditional analogic means of payment is cash. Cash is a token-based system as its value is – 
at least in its modern form7 – incorporated in the object by order of the authority. To ensure they 
have correctly acquired the value, t he payee only needs to check the authenticity of the 
banknote/coin. In contrast, in the digital arena no such token exists. To pay online, it is always 
necessary to use an intermediary8 – a credit card company, a digital money provider, a bank, etc. – 
that keeps the balance and transfers the value among individuals. This structural difference means 
that the progressive digitalization of financial transactions caused a shift from a token -based 
system to an account-based one.  
It is within the historical framework of this changing architecture of financial transactions, that the 
anti-money laundering regulation was first conceived and implemented. The policymaker 
intercepted this modification and adopted a synergic strategy aimed at maximizing the monitoring 
ability. 
This strategy is constituted by two main threads.  
First, the regulation of an increasing number of intermediaries.  
 
7 For the shift from gold backed money to fiat currency see I. Asmundson – C. Oner, What is money?, cit., 
“Until relatively recently, gold and silver were the main currency people used. Gold and silver are heavy, though, and over time, 
instead of carrying the actual metal around and exchanging it for goods, people found it more convenient to deposit precious 
metals at banks and buy and sell using a note that claimed ownership of the gold or silver deposits. Anyone who wanted to 
could go to the bank and get the precious metal that backs the note. Eventually, the paper claim on the precious metal was 
delinked from the metal. When that link was broken, fiat money was born. Fiat money is materially worthless, but has value 
simply because a nation collectively agrees to ascribe a value to it ”. This shift from a gold backed to a State backed 
currency is one of the recurring themes of the pro -crypto discourse, as it is perceived as a violation of 
individual freedom. With gold, it is argued, everyone held a value independently, with fiat currenc y, 
contrarily, the individual is subordinate to the whims of the Leviathan. For this reason many crypto project 
try to re-establish this connection between money and a “real” value as gold, or non -volatile stocks so to 
free the individual from the choices of the Central Bank – see as an example Tether Gold a cryptocurrency 
that is claimed to be fully backed by gold, https://gold.tether.to/.  
8 N. Bilotta, CBDCs and Stablecoins: The Scramble for (Controllable) Anonymity in N. Bilotta - F. Botti (eds.)  The 
(Near) Future of Central Bank Digital Currencies, Peter Lang International Academic Publisher, 2021, 168. 
 87 
The structure of  digital transactions means the  market is rooted in a  series of information 
bottlenecks. As digital transactions are necessarily intermediated, digital exchanges of value are 
overwhelmingly processed by a handful of intermediaries. These intermediaries act as filters of all 
the exchanges of value carried out in cyberspace.9 This role of filter means that intermediaries have 
privileged access to a massive amount of data concerning the financial transactions performed and 
received by all of their customers. The anti -money laundering legislation exploits this privileged 
position through the regulation of the companies/individuals holding them. Intermediaries  have 
become the object of increasingly fine -grained monitoring duties  with respect to their clients. 
Within this system, private players are, hence, entrusted with a crime control function : they need 
to guarantee – up to a reasonable degree – that their customers do not use their services to commit 
crimes or move and/or enjoy illicitly -sourced funds. The regulator, thus, establishes a system of 
decentralized policing partially shifting the burden, and the cost, of the, typically public, crime 
control function onto private actors.  
Second, the limitation in the use of cash.  
The financial integrity regulation introduces increasingly stringent requirements to limit the 
possibility for an individual to hold and pay in cash. This regulatory strand is functional to 
enhancing the effectiveness of the first strand . Namely, it aims at increasing the number of 
transactions that pass by the intermediated system and are, thus, traceable under the anti-money 
laundering regulation.  
To sum up, the anti-money laundering regulation is introduced concurrently with a historical shift 
in the architecture of financial transactions that opened new opportunities for the policymaker: 
the progressive digitalization of the financial market and t he corresponding shift from a token -
based to an account-based transaction system. The policymaker intercepts this transformation by 
introducing a regulation rooted in two synergic strands: the limitation in the use of cash and the 
imposition on intermediaries of a duty to monitor and report their customers. 
 
 
9 TRM Labs, Compliance in the second age of digital assets: How crypto compliance programs are evolving in 2023 , 2023, 
3. 
 88 
2. Understanding the crypto risk. Governance and access 
disintermediation 
 
Now that we have introduced the fundamental strategy underlying the anti -money laundering 
regulation, we can easily understand why blockchain represents a thorn in the side of this policy 
field.  
As explained in chapter one, the crypto -assets movement constitutes a reaction precisely to the 
abovementioned shift from tokens to accounts in the architecture of monetary transactions. 
Alarmed by the progressive substitution of cash with digital transactions, and the corresponding 
social monitoring potential, a group of technologists worked on a digital means of exchange that 
could avoid this mandatory surveillance with a view to protecting individual privacy.10  
To achieve this goal, the blockchain is designed to circumvent the main strategy underlying the 
anti-money laundering legislation: the progressive regulation of intermediaries, the information 
bottlenecks that, in an account-based system, are the necessary checkpoints of the financial flows 
infrastructure.11 
The blockchain, to this end, enables peer-to-peer transactions in the digital realm .12 This way it 
circumvents the necessity for the individual to use an intermediary and undermines the logic 
 
10 P. Armer, Computer Technology and surveillance, University of Stanford - Center for Advanced Study in the 
Behavioral Sciences, 1975, 11 – 12, “The point here is that it's not enough just to have the option of using cash, the cash 
option must be used frequently or it becomes useless as a means for privacy (…) an EFTS (Electronic funds transfer system) 
system (…) was the best surveillance system we  could imagine within the constraint that it not be obtrusive ”; D. Carlisle, 
Virtual currencies and financial crime: Challenges and opportunities , cit., 1. This is not to mean that promoting 
individual privacy is the only goal pursued by blockchain’s creator. Other key goals include circumventing 
the need to break the monopoly of Central Banks in the issuance and management of the currency and to 
trust financial intermediaries. However, given the scope of the present dissertation the financial monitoring 
goal constitutes the most relevant one. 
11 M. Campbell-Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global anti -money laundering governance, cit., 286; C. Rueckert, 
Cryptocurrencies and fundamental rights, cit., 3, “in the context of traditional, “real” currencies, this concept is effective because 
a person can only participate in the deposit money system with a bank account (and huge amounts of cash are hard to store 
and transport, especially across borders). In contrast to that, in the Bitcoin system users can create their own “account” (= the 
wallet) on their own de- vice and create as many key pairs as they want without involving any financial service provider”. 
12 R. Houben, Robby – A. Snyers, Cryptocurrencies and blockchain. Legal context and implications for financial crime, 
money laundering and tax evasion , cit., 17, “ blockchain is all about decentralizing trust and enabling decentralized 
authentication of transactions. Simply put, it allows to cut out the “middleman”.  
 89 
behind the financial monitoring regulation. 13 While such a result is momentous and profoundly 
dents the effectiveness of anti -money laundering controls, 14 it does not constitute a complete 
return to cash. This is because the mentioned achievement is not obtained through the 
reinstatement of a token-based transaction system but by tweaking the pre-existing account-based 
system.  
Notwithstanding many associate blockchain with terms  such as “tokenization” or “token 
economy”, from an anti-money laundering standpoint blockchain is still an account-based system. 
In the blockchain, exchanges of value happen through the insertion of a new entry in the common 
ledger determining the transfer of value from A to B. 15 There is no such thing as a standalone 
token exchanged between participants only based on its intrinsic value. Counterparty identification 
is, thus, still a crucial element of crypto transactions. The main difference with traditional electronic 
value exch ange system s is that the financial ledger is not own ed and updated by a centralized 
authority but by a decentralized network of nodes.  
This notation is a relevant one as blockchain’s privacy structure inherits some elements of account-
based systems in terms of traceability. Understanding this privacy structure with respect to the 
current money-laundering regulation is crucial as it consti tutes the premise of any analysis to be 
carried out in this field.  
Let’s then start with what makes blockchain more private compared to the previous system and 
then pass to what makes it more transparent.  
 
13 G. Soana, Regulating cryptocurrency checkpoints. Fighting a trench war with cavalry?, in Economic Notes, 2021, 2; 
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, Beyond Silk Road: potential risks, threats, and 
promises of virtual currencies , Washington, 2013, 34; D. Brown, Cryptocurrency and Criminality: The Bitcoin 
Opportunity in The Police Journal: Theory, Practice and Principles , 2016, 328; K Kolachala et al., SoK: Money 
Laundering in Cryptocurrencies, in The 16th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security , 2021, 1; 
Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset Service 
Providers, Paris, 2021, 18, “ P2P transactions are not explicitly subject to AML/CFT controls under the FATF 
Standards. This is because the Standards generally place obligations on intermediaries, rather than on individuals themselves”; 
M. Campbell-Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global anti-money laundering governance, cit., 286. 
14 C. Accorsi – R. Brening – G. Müller, Economic analysis of cryptocurrency backed money laundering in Twenty‐Third 
European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), 2015, 4  
15 For an in-depth analysis of blockchain’s functioning and its transaction system’s structure see chapter 
two, section five. 
 90 
As analysed in chapter two, the main privacy feature of blockchain is connected to the 
decentralization of its governance and the pseudonymity of its accounts.16  
To access the market in the traditional system each customer needs to use an intermediary that 
holds their account and records their transactions. In contrast, with blockchain anyone can create 
a private key and from it compute a public key and an address.17 Through this key the user is fully 
integrated in the market and can start receiving and sending crypto -assets. This disintermediated 
manner of accessing the market means that no  one can filter – and thus identify (through Know 
Your Customer procedures) – new participants.18 At the same time, the system through which 
participants are identified in the blockchain when performing transactions – the address – does 
not provide any information regarding the identity of the person using that specific account.  
Due to such a privacy structure , these assets are labelled pseudonymous.19 Eminently, an address 
is associated with each transaction carried out within the system. However, the address is identified 
through a pseudonym that does not provide any information regarding the real -world identity of 
the individual using it.20 Furthermore, the absence of any mandatory point of access means that, if 
the user does use an intermediary at any point, no one can pierce the pseudonymity veil.21 
 
16 C. Leuprecht - C. Jenkins – R. Hamilton, Virtual money laundering: policy implications of the proliferation in the 
illicit use of cryptocurrency, cit., 2; for a detailed analysis of blockchain’s privacy structure see chapter 2 section 
6. 
17 See chapter two, section five. 
18 L. Haffke – M. Fromberger – P. Zimmermann, Cryptocurrencies and anti-money laundering: the shortcomings of 
the fifth AML Directive (EU) and how to address them , in Journal of Banking Regulation,  2, 2020, 129, “ on a 
decentralised Blockchain, transactions are not automatically screened for illegal activities by a party that is centrally 
responsible”; R. Houben, Robby – A. Snyers, Cryptocurrencies and blockchain. Legal context and implications for 
financial crime, money laundering and tax evasion, cit., 54; R. Coelho – J. Fishman – D. Garcia Ocampo, Supervising 
cryptoassets for anti-money laundering, Bank for International Settlements, Financial Stability Institute, 2021, 3. 
19 D. Carlisle, Virtual currencies and financial crime: Challenges and opportunities, cit., 9. 
20 A. Trozze, et al., Cryptocurrencies and future financial crime, cit., 2; T. Frick, Virtual and cryptocurrencies—regulatory 
and anti-money laundering approaches in the European Union and in Switzerland, cit., 100. 
21 See Financial Action Task Force, Virtual Currencies. Key definitions and potential AML/CFT risks, Paris, 2014, 
9, “Decentralised systems are particularly vulnerable to anonymity risks. For example, by design, Bitcoin addresses, which 
function as accounts, have no names or other customer identification attached, and the system has no central server or servic e 
provider. The Bitcoin protocol does not require or provide identification and verification of participants or generate historical 
records of transactions that are necessarily associated with real world identity. There is no central oversight body, and no AML 
software currently available to monitor and identify suspicious transaction patterns. Law enforcement cannot target one central 
location or entity (administrator) for investigative or asset seizure purposes (although authorities can target individual 
exchangers for client information that the exchanger may collect). It thus offers a level of potential anonymity impossible with 
traditional credit and debit cards or older online payment systems, such as PayPal” . This does not mean that 
deanonymization is not possible through blockchain analytics and other computer forensics methods, on 
that see S. MeikleJohn et al., A Fistful of Bitcoins: Characterizing Payments among Men with No Names, in Proceedings 
of the 2013 Conference on Internet Measurement Conference , 2016, and the section 6 of chapter 4. Rather that no 
 91 
At the same time, blockchain is not a token -based system. In such systems, value exchanges are 
carried out by simply shifting the control of the valuable token – whether a bill or a bar of gold – 
from payer to payee. While pseudonymous, blockchain transactions still need to be recorded on a 
ledger and connected to the addresses of the two parties to be validly performed. The fact that a 
certain individual owns a certain amount of crypto-assets does not derive from the possession of 
a token but by the circum stance that the blockchain ledger assigns to a certain address a claim 
towards the network: the right to transfer a predetermined number of crypto -assets to another 
address of their choice. This entails that, in contrast to cash where there is no architectural need 
to record transactions, blockchain transactions leave a money trail that can be ex post analysed and 
examined.22 
What is more , is that this trace is public and logically unified. As detailed in chapter two, 
blockchain’s recordkeeping system is, in contrast with the traditional infrastructure, decentralized 
in terms of access and governance and centralized in terms of content. This means that, while 
pseudonymity and decentralization present a challenge to the anti -money laundering policy 
strategy, blockchain’s information structure has aspects that may, if correctly exploited, facilitate 
monitoring. 
First, the ledger is public whereas traditional intermediaries’ ledgers are private. 23 This creates a 
new connection between the supervisory authority and the financial information as the first can 
directly access and analyse the latter. Also, each intermediary can monitor not only the transactions 
its customer carries out through their systems but also what their behaviour is within the whole 
network. 
 
entity has access to the identity of the account holder and/or is in a position to deanonymize it through a 
mandatory identification process.  
22 As underlined by European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document Accompanying the document 
Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of the risk of money laundering 
and terrorist financing affecting the internal market and relating to cross-border activities, SWD(2022), 27th October 2022, 
94, “We note, however, that crypto-assets transactions conducted on public distributed ledgers leave immutable traces and are 
there for everyone to see. Persons engaging in ML/TF via such crypto asset transactions expose themselves to public scrutiny 
of their t ransactions”; C. Pelker Alden – C. Brown – R. Tucker, Using Blockchain Analysis from Investigation to 
Trial, cit., 91. 
23 For an analysis of blockchain’s recordkeeping system see chapter 2, section 2; D. Carlisle, Virtual currencies 
and financial crime: Challenges and opportunities, cit., 5, “Once the FBI established that a particular Silk Road user was 
using specific public wallet addresses, it could trace that individual’s transaction history on the blockchain.19 The cypherpunks 
had envisioned cryptocurrencies as a means for engaging in comme rce outside of government view, yet the blockchain offered a 
fully public money trail of Bitcoin transactions for law enforcement to use in its investigations ”; on blockchain analytics 
and its policy implications see chapter 4, section 6. 
 92 
Second, the ledger records all the transactions carried out with a certain currency in a consequential 
manner whereas traditional ledgers only record the transactions carried out by the intermediaries’ 
customer. This means that, in the traditional system, to piece together an individual’s money trail, 
the investigator has to jump from one ledger to the other trying to piece together the respective 
entries. In contrast, in blockchain ecosystems all the information is saved in a single ledger that is 
then distributed in terms of access, making this exercise of piecing together the money trail sizably 
easier.  
To sum up, blockchain’s disintermediation and decentralized governance24 challenge the traditional 
financial flows control strategy rooted in intermediaries as they allow users to directly enter the 
market and transact with each other peer -to-peer.25 At the same time, blockchain does not 
represent a complete return to the token system, hence its transactions still leave the paper trail 
typical of account -based systems. This paper trail has certain peculiarities compared with th ose 
typical of traditional value exchange infrastructures. On the downside, this paper trail is 
pseudonymous and not controlled by any centralized body. On the bright side (at least for financial 
monitoring), is accessible and logically centralized.  
Having understood the key features of the blockchain risk, it is now possible to critically evaluate 
the policy strategy that, since 2014, has been enacted to mitigate it.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 This risk is specifically identified – along with peer-to-peer transactions – by Financial Action Task Force, 
Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset Service Providers, cit., 40. 
25 As underlined by European Banking Authority, Opinion on “Virtual Currencies”, Paris, 2014, 32, “The risk 
arises because senders and recipients can carry out VC transactions on a peer -to- peer basis that do not require personal 
identification as there are no names attached to wallet addresses. Furthermore, there is no intermediary that could notify 
authorities of suspicious transactions. The priority of the risk is high”. 
 93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 94 
Part one 
 
Setting the stage 
The definitory conundrum 
 
 
Our analysis regarding the regulation of crypto -assets cannot but start by exploring how 
policymakers have drawn the normative boundaries of this concept.  
As we will come to understand this is a complex exercise 26 as the object of regulation is, at the 
same time, elusive and politically sensitive.27 
First, crypto -assets are an elusive category as they evolve at a dazzling pace with new 
implementations emerging in the space of months. 28 Also, this is a market that has, since its 
conception, the explicit political purpose of displacing traditional power dynamics.29 This means 
that, on the one hand, the development of crypto -assets mostly happened outside of traditional 
markets and, at least initially, almost without the participation of traditional, established players, as 
financial institutions, or large corporations. On the other hand, the participants to this market are 
particularly averse to regulation and have sometimes shown an almost ideological opposition to 
 
26 European Central Bank Crypto -assets Task Force, Crypto-Assets: Implications for financial stability, monetary 
policy, and payments and market infrastructures, Occasional Paper series no. 223, 2019, 7. 
27 C. Kuner – F. Cate – O. Lynskey – C. Millard – N. Ni Loideain – D. Svantesson, Blockchain versus data 
protection, cit., 103. 
28 The blockchain ecosystem, born initially as a network to sustain a private currency – the Bitcoin – has 
given rise to a baffling number of use cases that have nothing to do with the concept of currency, as Initial 
Coin Offerings, Decentralized Autonomous Organizations, Non-Fungible Tokens etc., used in areas as 
different as start up financing, supply chain management, art, and collectibles etc.; C. Rueckert, 
Cryptocurrencies and fundamental rights, cit., 2. 
29 See Chapter one on the historical roots of blockchain and crypto-assets.  
 95 
any State intervention .30 While the growing maturity of the market and the emergence of 
established players is softening these macrotrends 31 these can still be regarded as relevant 
characteristics of the crypto-assets community. 
Second, the governance model proposed by blockchain is disruptive. It technically allows (at least 
in theory) to displace the traditional hierarchical, centralized model of governance in favour of a 
collaborative, decentralized system. 32 This means that regulators – which are among the central 
points of control this technology aims at eliminating or bypassing – have been particularly cautious 
when dealing with blockchain, especially in its permissionless form.  
More than a decade after Bitcoin’s introduction, the debate concerning how crypto-assets should 
be defined and regulated is still open and lively. Both the content and the name to be used for this 
conceptual category are at the fore of the policy debate in and outside Europe.33  
This lively debate has caused a lack of consistency in the terms used by the legislat ures.34 Clear 
depiction of such lack of consistency is the fact that, taking the anti -money laundering field and 
Europe alone, there are three competing terms used to identify them. The FATF adopts the term 
“virtual asset”, the current European legislation the te rm “virtual currencies”, while the most 
recent Union’s legislations (the Market in Crypto-asset Regulation, the Travel Rule Regulation, and 
upcoming Anti -money Laundering Package ) the term “crypto -assets”. Furthermore, the 
 
30 On the necessity for a change of mindset in the community see K Kolachala et al., SoK: Money Laundering 
in Cryptocurrencies, cit., 8. 
31 This trend of gentrification and corresponding shift from ideologically opposing any form of regulation 
to embracing it is not dissimilar to the one experienced by the internet itself. As described by P. Anderson, 
Cypherpunk ethics. Radical ethics for the digital age , cit., 6, “the hackers all seemed to share an implicit set of beliefs: that 
computers could improve people’s lives, that access to computers ought to be unfettered, that systems of centralized authorit y 
ought to be replaced with decentralized systems, that people sho uld take a hands -on approach to technology, and —perhaps 
most famously—that all information should be free. By the early 1980s, however, the hacker ethos of openness, sharing, and 
decentralization had been eclipsed by business imperatives, with emerging computer and software manufacturers facing financial 
incentives that promoted the development of a closed, proprietary, and centralized culture”. 
32 Karasek-Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering instruments and European data protection 
requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces, cit., 19. 
33 For an analysis of the labels used by the different regulatory and supervisory authorities see, R. Houben 
– A. Snyers, Cryptocurrencies and blockchain. Legal context and implications for financial crime, money laundering and tax 
evasion, cit., 20, who conclude that “there is no generally accepted definition of the term cryptocurrencies available in the 
regulatory space. Even more, most policy makers have refrained from defining the term altogether ”; World Economic 
Forum, Pathways to the Regulation of Crypto-Assets: A Global Approach, White Paper, 2023, 6, “a DLT-based crypto 
token may be termed a “virtual asset” in one jurisdiction but a “crypto token” or even a “virtual digital asset” in another 
(each with differing definitions) and be banned in a third”.  
34 T. Frick, Virtual and cryptocurrencies—regulatory and anti-money laundering approaches in the European Union and in 
Switzerland, cit., 101.  
 96 
abovementioned definitions do not only differ in terms of the label used but also as to the content 
and even as to the regulatory approach.  
This definitory instability underlines how, notwithstanding more than a decade has passed since 
Nakamoto published their seminal paper, the legislation is still in a “pilot phase”. Our analysis will, 
thus, start from a critical evaluation of this definitory debate and of the solution adopted in order 
to identify its guidelines and weak points . We will  then propose possible avenues for the 
development of a more balanced and customized approach. 
 
1. The Financial Action Task Force 
 
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is the unavoidable starting point of our analysis for two 
main reasons. 
On the one hand, the FATF is a key player in the financial integrity arena, a field that has known, 
also thanks to this Body, a great degree of international standardization.  35 FATF’s Standard and 
Guidances, despite their soft law status, are most of the times copy pasted in national legislations36 
and can, thus, be regarded as a golden standard when it comes to financial integrity.37  
 
35 L. Dalla Pellegrina – D. Masciandaro, The risk -based approach in the new European anti -money laundering 
legislation: a law and economics view  in Review of law & economics,  2, 2009, 935; R. Pol, Anti-money laundering: The 
world's least effective policy experiment? Together, we can fix it, in Policy design and practice, 1, 2020, 76, “FATF’s anti- 
money laundering standards, in effect, dictate policies, laws and regulatory practices in 205 countries and jurisdictions ”, M. 
Campbell-Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto -coins, and global anti -money laundering governance, cit., 292; I. Karasek -
Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering instruments and European data protection requirements in 
permissionless blockchain spaces, cit., 2. 
36 For a critical review of this policymaking process see P. Van Duyne – J. H. Harvey – L. Y. 
Gelemerova, The critical handbook of money laundering: Policy, analysis and myths, cit., 145. 
37 A. Moiseienko, Does international law prohibit the facilitation of money laundering? in Leiden Journal of International 
Law, 2022, 6 -7; C. Leuprecht  - C. Jenkins – R. Hamilton, Virtual money laundering: policy implications of the 
proliferation in the illicit use of cryptocurrency, cit., 12; B. Mesquita – S. Maranhao – J. Seigneur, Enabling KYC and 
AML verification in DeFi service , cit., 1. For a criticism of this approach to policy making in the field see V. 
Mitsilegas – N. Vavoula, The evolving EU anti-money laundering regime: challenges for fundamental rights and the rule 
of law in Maastricht Journal of European and Comparative Law, 2, 266 – 270, “the FATF Recommendations has been 
mostly adopted without criticism by the European Commission in its proposals for Union law in the field and subsequently by 
Member States in the Council and by the European Parliament as co- legislators. In this manner, a specific agenda developed 
 97 
On the other hand, the FATF has been a pioneer in the regulation of crypto-assets. Its first Report 
on virtual currencies dates back to 2014 38 and the first Guidance to 2015 .39 The first sectorial 
European legislation – the Fifth Anti-money Laundering Directive40 – was only introduced three 
years later, in 2018, and is almost a replica of the FATF Guidance.  
The FATF has, thus, been a forerunner of crypto-assets regulation. This status is slowly changing 
as the market grows and evolves and States adopt a customized approach aimed at injecting their 
policy perspective in the evolution and architecture of these assets. Such a shift is clearly signalled, 
at the European level, by the Market in Crypto-asset Regulation (MiCaR) that aims at becoming a 
global standard in the sectorial regulation and, as further detailed , takes a partially different 
approach compared to the FATF. Notwithstanding this progressive “nationalization” of the 
crypto-asset regulation, the FATF definitions and guidelines played, and still play, a crucial role in 
shaping the way European anti-money laundering policymakers look at this field. 
 
1.1 The first definition. The Financial Action Task Force’s Guidance of 
2015 and the definition of virtual currencies. 
 
The first step in the crypto -assets legislation is the FATF’s Report of 2014 and the subsequent 
Guidance of 2015. These two documents bear the first normative definition of what we now call 
crypto-assets. At the time, the term adopted to identify these assets was, however, different. In 
2014, the FATF labelled this emerging category as “virtual currency”.  
A virtual currency was defined as: 
“a digital representation of value that can be digitally traded and functions as 
(1) a medium of exchange; and/or (2) a unit of account; and/or (3) a store of value, but does not 
 
by technocrats and with limited scrutiny at the global level has been legitimized, via the EU decision -making process, and 
adopted at the Union level to bind both FATF and non-FATF members”. 
38 Financial Action Task Force, Virtual Currencies. Key definitions and potential AML/CFT risks, cit. 
39 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk -based approach. Virtual Currencies, cit.; M. Campbell -
Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global anti-money laundering governance, cit., 293. 
40 Directive of the European Union, 30th May 2018, n. 843. 
 98 
have legal tender status (i.e., when tendered to a creditor, is a valid and legal offer of payment) in 
any jurisdiction. It is not issued nor guaranteed by any jurisdiction, and fulfils the above functions 
only by agreement within the community of users of the virtual currency. Virtual currency is 
distinguished from fiat currency (a.k.a. “real currency,” “real money,” or “national currency”), 
which is the coin and paper money of a country that is designated as its legal tender; circulates; and 
is customarily used and accepted as a medium of exchange in the issuing country. It is distinct from 
e-money, which is a digital representation of fiat currency used to electronically transfer value 
denominated in fiat currency. E-money is a digital transfer mechanism for fiat currency—i.e., it 
electronically transfers value that has legal tender status” .41 
In analysing this definition there are two synergic, and equally important, elements we need to 
consider: the name chosen to label these assets and the content of the definition.  
The name chosen by the FATF to identify this new category of assets is “virtual currency”. Both 
of the terms used tell a story: the term “currency” tells us how the regulator perceived these assets 
– a perception that will change in time – the term “virtual” tells us about its regulatory strategy – 
one that, at least at the FATF level, has stuck up to the present day. 
 
1.1.1 The “currency” aspect of the virtual currency definition 
 
Let’s start, then, with the term currency.  
From a historical perspective, the decision of the FATF to choose the term currency underlines 
the Bitcoin-centric nature of this first Guidance. In 2014, the Regulator saw crypto -assets mostly 
as a single purpose technology, as Bitcoin is. This single purpose was to provide the digital market 
with a private, decentralized means of exchange to transact online while staying out of the purview 
of traditional intermediaries and Central Banks. Such perception of crypto-assets’ purpose – while 
it would prove incorrect in the medium term – is justifiable taking into account the period when 
this first Guidance was introduced. At the time, Ethereum had just been created and Bitcoin had 
 
41 Financial Action Task Force, Virtual Currencies. Key definitions and potential AML/CFT risks, cit., 4. 
 99 
the lion’s share of the market . Other implementations (as ICOs ,42 NFTs, and DAOs) would be 
introduced only during the following years.  
Furthermore, as detailed in chapter one, this first policy effort was essentially a reaction triggered 
by a series of highly publicized cases that highlighted the aptitude of crypto-assets to be used as a 
facilitator of crime.43 All of these cases – from the first dark market Silk Road44 to the ransomware 
CryptoLocker45 – exploited one fundamental function of crypto -assets: the means of exchange 
 
42 For a description of what an ICO is see A. Delivorias, Understanding initial coin offerings. A new means of raising 
funds based on blockchain, European Parliamentary Research Service, 2021; A. Ferreira – P. Sandner, Eu search 
for regulatory answers to crypto assets and their place in the financial markets’ infrastructure , in Computer Law & Security 
Review, 43, 2021, 5; Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and 
Virtual Asset Service Providers, cit., 30-31. 
43 For a first-hand depiction of the political climate at the time, see Committee on Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs, Beyond Silk Road: potential risks, threats, and promises of virtual currencies , cit., for the 
videorecording see https://www.hsgac.senate.gov/hearings/beyond-silk-road-potential-risks-threats-and-
promises-of-virtual-currencies.  
44 Silk Road was a digital marketplace, created in 2011, where it was possible to anonymously sell and buy 
any product – legal and illegal. Bitcoin constituted a fundamental piece of this criminal scheme, as it allowed 
users to bypass traditional financial i nstitution and, thus, protect their anonymity by circumventing the 
corresponding anti-money laundering identification and monitoring duties. For this reason, Bitcoin was the 
only means of payment accepted on Silk Road. The notoriety of this marketplace created a strong sense of 
urgency among policymakers regarding the need to take action and bring Bitcoin under control. To have 
an understanding regarding the policymakers’ view at the time, see Committee on Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs, Beyond Silk Road: potential risks, threats, and promises of virtual currencies , cit. For a brief 
history of Silk Road see D. Adler, Silk Road: The Dark Side of Cryptocurrency, in Fordham Journal of Corporate and 
Financial Law Blog, 21 February 2018, https://news.law.fordham.edu/jcfl/2018/02/21/silk-road-the-dark-
side-of-cryptocurrency/. It is interesting to notice how the creation of such a marketplace had been 
foreseen by the same group that first envisioned the idea of cryptocurrencies, see T. May, The cryptoanarchist 
manifesto, cit., “crypto anarchy will allow national secrets to be traded freely and will allow illicit and stolen materials to be 
traded. An anonymous computerized market will even make possible abhorrent markets for assassinations and extortion ”. 
For the dark market risk see European Banking Authority, Opinion on “Virtual Currencies”, cit., 33. 
45 Cryptolocker is a ransomware attack that was first launched in 2013. This malware encrypts the files on 
the victim’s computer and then asks for a ransom in exchange for their decryption. If the victim does not 
pay, they lose access to their files. The role of Bitcoin is, also here, that of means of payment. Namely, the 
ransom is usually requested by these malwares in Bitcoin so to guarantee that they are out the purview of 
enforcement agencies that could seize them. For a description of Cryptolocker see, C ybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency, Cryptolocker Ransomware Infections Alert (TA13 -309A), 5 November 2013, 
https://www.cisa.gov/uscert/ncas/alerts/TA13-309A; for the risk European Banking Authority, Opinion 
on “Virtual Currencies”, cit., 34. 
 100 
function.46 Therefore, at the time, the FATF’s primary objective was to address the currency aspect 
of crypto-assets, as this seemed the most pressing one for financial integrity.47 
The first reaction of the FATF was, hence, to frame this “new thing” as a currency, as it seemed 
to perform the fundamental function of money: the means of exchange one.  
The currency-centric nature of this early definition is also reflected in its content. To explain what 
virtual currencies are, the FATF refers to what virtual currencies, in its perspective, do. This is that 
virtual currencies function as “(1) a medium of exchange; and/or (2) a unit of account; and/or (3) a store of 
value”. This function-based definition does not, however, stem from an empirical observation of 
the real-world use of virtual currencies. Rather it merely replicates the three functions of money as 
per the classic economic theory.48  
If classifying crypto -assets as a currency is an understandable choice, taking into account the 
historical and criminological context, copy pasting the definition of money and using it as the 
definition of virtual currencies is not. While the means of exchange function is a, al though 
recessive, aspect of crypto-assets, it is quite clear that crypto-assets do not perform and have never 
performed a unit of account or a store of value function.49  
This unfitness is clear if we analyse what it means for a currency to serve as a unit of account and 
store of value.  
 
46 This aptitude as a facilitator of criminal payments online has remained stable over time as underlined by 
Europol, Internet Organized Crime Threat Assessment, 2020, 17, “ Reliability, irreversibility of transactions and a 
perceived degree of anonymity have made cryptocurrencies the default payment method for victim -to-criminal payments in 
ransomware and other extortion schemes, as well as criminal -to- criminal payments on t he Darkweb ”; European 
Commission, Commission Staff Working Document Accompanying the document Report from the Commission to the 
European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of the risk of money laundering and terrorist financing affecting the 
internal market and relating to cross-border activities, cit., 95. 
47 This focus on the means of exchange function is expressly stated in the introduction of the 2015 Guidance 
that, when defining its scope, says: this Guidance does not address “non-payments uses of VC (e.g., store-of-value 
products for savings or investment purposes, such as derivatives, commodities, and securities products) or the monetary polic y 
dimension of VC activities” in Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual Currencies, 
cit., 4. 
48 M. Carney, The Future of Money, Bank of England, 2018, 3; Bank of England, Central Bank Digital Currency 
Opportunities, challenges and design, London, 2020, 11; K. Fatjon – E. Martino – A. M. Pacces, fintech and The 
Law and Economics of Disintermediation, cit., 9. 
49 M. Carney, The Future of Money, cit., 7; K. Fatjon – E. Martino – A. M. Pacces, fintech and The Law and 
Economics of Disintermediation, cit., 9, “Traditionally, money has been defined according to three functions it performs in the 
economy: medium of exchange, store of value, and unit of account.50 Arguably, given the current state of technology, 
cryptocurrencies perform none of these functions”. 
 101 
On the one hand, the unit of account function implies that the currency can be used to keep 
accounts, transact, and assign a value to goods. A currency is a unit of account when it can, for 
example, be used to calculate and express the market value of something. To exemplify, when I 
say that an ice cream costs two euros, I am using the currency Euro as a unit of account.  
On the other hand, the store of value function implies that the currency is a reliable instrument to 
preserve value over time. This entails that market participants can expect to be paid with a currency 
today and spend it tomorrow, in a month, or a year wi thout significantly losing the underlying 
value. For this reason, perishable goods – such as wheat – are not efficient currencies . This is 
because the payor cannot simply hold them and be sure to store a value that can be spent at any 
time in the future.  
There is, hence, one fundamental characteristic that impedes to an asset from serving as a unit of 
account and/or a store of value: the extreme volatility of its price.50  
A volatile good cannot serve as a unit of account because no rational business would price its 
goods using as a reference an asset whose price changes constantly and unpredictably. How could 
a reliable price be established, so to cover costs and guarantee a profit, if the asset used as a unit 
of account is worth ten today, twenty in a month, and five in three months?  
The practical consequences of this dilemma are clear if we analyse the penetration of Bitcoin as a 
retail means of payment. Notwithstanding much fanfare at the beginning of the last decade with 
large retailers announcing that they would start accepting Bitcoin, the retail use of Bitcoin as a 
means of payment never took o ff. At the same time, the retailers that do accept payments in 
Bitcoin (or other cryptos) do not hold the tokens they receive but immediately exchange them in 
fiat currencies to avoid the risks connected to its volatility.51  
At the same time, an asset whose value fluctuates so dramatically cannot serve as a store of value. 
The core characteristic of a store of value is precisely to store the value and, hence, keep a relatively 
stable price over a medium to long period of time. Dramatic fluctuations of the price, while they 
 
50 S. Schwarcz, Regulating Digital Currencies: Towards an Analytical Framework , in Boston University Law Review , 
102, 2022, 7; M. Campbell -Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global anti -money laundering governance , cit., 285; 
European Central Bank Crypto-assets Task Force, Crypto-Assets: Implications for financial stability, monetary policy, 
and payments and market infrastructures, cit., 9. 
51 M. Carney, The Future of Money, cit., 9; European Banking Authority, Opinion on “Virtual Currencies”, cit., 
17. 
 102 
can make a speculative asset very attractive – at least for those able to jump on the rollercoaster at 
the right time – eliminate the core functions of a currency and impede to qualify it as a store of 
value.52 
Now, one of the core characteristics of crypto -assets (as well as  arguably one of the reasons for 
their market success) has been, at least up until now, the extreme volatility and unpredictability of 
their price.53 To assess that, we can just take the price of Bitcoin, or any other crypto-asset, in any 
given year. Let’s take 2020 as an example. On the 2 nd of January 2020, the price of Bitcoin was 
7.175 dollars, on the 3 rd of June 2020 9.525 dollars, and on the 3 rd of January 2021 it was 32.216 
dollars. T he same pattern is replicated by all other crypto -assets with even more dramatic 
fluctuations happening with smaller or less relevant ones.54  
While work is underway to create a so-called stable coin55 – a crypto-asset that will keep a relatively 
stable value over time – we seem to be still very far from any credible implementation and were 
certainly very far from it in 2014. Some of the most relevant proposals have so far failed due to 
regulatory pushback56 – as in the case of Lybra/Diem – or to failures of the underlying logic – as 
happened with the Terra/Luna coin.  
This first definition of the FATF, hence, adopts a currency centric approach to crypto-assets that 
completely equates crypto-assets and fiat currency, at least in terms of function . So much so that 
it is the same definition that has to explicitly draw a line between virtual currencies and fiat 
currencies. It does so by clarifying that the main difference between virtual and fiat is that the 
former is accepted by agreement within the community of users, while the latter due to the order 
of the government.  
At least for what concerns the currency aspect of this definition, the FATF seems to have  not 
formulated a customized definition for this new category of assets. Rather, it operated a blanket 
 
52 Banca d’Italia, Comunicazione della Banca d’Italia in materia di tecnologie decentralizzate nella finanza e cripto-attività, 
cit., 9. 
53 D. Carlisle, Virtual currencies and financial crime: Challenges and opportunities, cit., 2; K. Fatjon – E. Martino – 
A. M. Pacces, fintech and The Law and Economics of Disintermediation, cit., 8. 
54 M. Carney, The Future of Money , cit., 7; on crypto -assets volatility see also E. Martino, Comparative 
Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional comparative analysis, cit., 7; Bank of England, 
Financial Stability in Focus: Cryptoassets and decentralised finance, cit., 9. 
55 W. Bolt – V. Lubbersen – P. Wierts, Getting the balance right: Crypto, stablecoin and central bank digital currency, 
in Journal of Payments Strategy & Systems, 16.1, 2022, 43; E. Martino, Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins 
Regulation A framework for a functional comparative analysis, cit., 7.  
56 K. Fatjon – E. Martino – A. M. Pacces, fintech and The Law and Economics of Disintermediation, cit., 9. 
 103 
equation between crypto -assets and the traditional concept of currency. Virtual currencies are, 
according to the FATF, nothing more than a privately issued fiat currency. 
 
1.1.2 The “virtual” aspect of the virtual currency definition 
 
This broad and nonspecific approach to the regulation of crypto -assets is also reflected by the 
second term chosen by the FATF: the “virtual” part of the expression “virtual currency”. The term 
was preferred by the legislator to the more common “crypto”. This is a critical preference as it 
reflects a specific policy approach that has survived up to the present day. 
To understand why choosing the term “virtual” expresses a normative choice, we need to first 
appreciate what the prefix “crypto” stands for. This prefix is the most common one in the public 
debate and is the one that was first adopted by market participants and observers to identify Bitcoin 
and related technologies. The reason for this diffusion is that the prefix crypto directly refers to 
the branch of knowledge that most contributed to the development of blockchain: cryptography.57 
As detailed in chapter two, cryptography is a key aspect of blockchain, one that underlies its 
security (through the hashing of blocks), its update (through the proof of work), and its transaction 
system (through private/public key cryptography). The prefix crypto, hence, directly connects the 
asset to the technology as it refers to the fact that a certain asset is rooted in cryptography and uses 
its concepts and methods to function.  
The FATF, by choosing the term “virtual”, decouples the normative perimeter of the anti-money 
laundering regulation from blockchain technology. This way, the Guidance aims at embracing a 
wider category of privately issued currencies. The only “technologica l” characteristic these 
currencies need to share is being digital in their static and dynamic sense – i.e., virtual currencies 
have to be a digital representation of value and be digitally tradable.58  
 
57 See the use made by European Banking Authority, Report with advice to the Commission on crypto-assets, cit., 6. 
58 The FATF excludes from the regulatory perimeter all the tokens that cannot be traded and only represent 
a value assigned by the issuer to the recipient of the token. 
 104 
This fundamental technological difference connected with the terms virtual and crypto is detailed 
by the same Guidance. Namely, right after the definition of “virtual currency”, the Guidance 
provides for a series of non-normative definitions. Among them, there is one that is of particular 
interest to this naming discussion: the definition of “cryptocurrencies”. Cryptocurrencies are 
identified by the Guidance as a species of the genus virtual currencies.  
Cryptocurrencies are defined as: 
“math-based, decentralised convertible virtual currency that is protected by cryptography —i.e., it incorporates 
principles of cryptography to implement a distributed, decentralised, secure information economy. Cryptocurrency 
relies on public and private keys to transfer value from one person (individual or entity) to another, and must be 
cryptographically signed each time it is transferred. The safety, integrity and balance of cryptocurrency ledgers is 
ensured by a network of mutually distrustful parties (in Bitcoin, referred to as miners) who protect the network in 
exchange for the opportunity to obtain a randomly distributed fee (in Bitcoin, a small number of newly created 
bitcoins, called the “block reward” and in some cases, also transaction fees paid by users as a incentive for miners 
to include their transactions in the next block)”.59 
If we read this definition in light of what has been explained in chapter two, it is clear that this is 
the real customized definition of crypto -assets. Hidden behind the definition of “virtual 
currencies”, the FATF precisely framed crypto -assets and identified their key elements: the 
governance system – decentralized and distributed – its identification framework – public/private 
key – and its update system – a network of mutually distrustfully parties that operate in a 
cooperative/competitive fashion.  
The question is, then, if the FATF had the technical ability and understanding to provide for a 
customized definition of crypto-assets, why it didn’t? Why did it adopt such a generic definition? 
The choice can be traced back to two, intertwined, reasons. 
The first reason for this choice is that the FATF espoused, when drafting this Guidance, the 
principle of technological neutrality.60 Technological neutrality has long constituted a fundamental 
 
59 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual Currencies, cit., 27. 
60 This adherence to the principles of technological neutrality is not directly expressed in the Guidance of 
2015. An explicit reference to this principle can be found in the following Guidance of 2019. The 2019 
Guidance clearly states that technological neu trality is one of the key principles underlying the FATF 
legislative approach and that the Guidance, thus, applies irrespective of the technological platform involved, 
 105 
tenet in the field of law and technology .61 As underlined by the literature, this is a vague concept 
that has yet to receive a clear definition. However, technological neutrality can be broadly defined 
as the rule according to which the law should “neither require nor assume a particular technology”.62  
The main ideological root of this principle is a market-oriented vision of the role of the legislator. 
The idea is that it is inefficient for the policymaker to advocate for a specific technology,63 rather, 
this choice should be left to the free movement of the market. The legislator should, thus, focus 
on activities not technologies.64 In this sense, the role of the regulator is to draw the boundaries of 
a certain field and/or human activity, irrespectively of the technology used by market participants.  
The second reason underlying this choice is the idea of “future proofing” 65 the regulation. In a 
rapidly and constantly evolving reality, this principle aims at ensuring that a certain policy is 
designed to stand the test of time. Future proofing is a recurring theme when it comes to the 
rationale of technological neutrality.66 The idea is that, in the field of new technologies, a regulation 
 
see Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 9. 
61 For an analysis of the origins and development of this principle see C. Reed, Taking sides on technology 
neutrality, in SCRIPTed: Journal of Law, Technology and Society , 4/3, 2007, 263 e ss.; M. Thompson, The 
Neutralization of Harmony: The Problem of Technological Neutrality, East and West , in B.U. J. Sci. & TECH. L. , 
18/303, 2012, 306; B. Greenberg, Rethinking Technology Neutrality in Minn. L. Rev, 2016, 100, 1512. 
62 Quote of the US Government’s Framework for Global Electronic Commerce of 1997, taken from C. Reed, 
Taking sides on technology neutrality, cit., 263. As underlined by the same author, technological neutrality is a 
principle that, while being widely used by regulators especially in the field of law and technology, has still 
not received a clear definition and is frequently used as a catchall concept under which very different policies 
are implemented; see also the definition of M. Thompson, The Neutralization of Harmony: The Problem of 
Technological Neutrality, East and West, cit., 306, “law should neither help nor hinder a particular type of technology”. As 
stated by B. Greenberg, Rethinking Technology Neutrality , cit., 1512, “ Technology neutrality's lodestar is intent to 
regulate behavior, not technology; to worry about what occurs, not how it occurs”.  
63 A. Escudero-Pascual – I. Hosein, Questioning lawful access to traffic data, in Communications of the ACM, 47/3, 
2004, 78. 
64 H. Axelsen – R. Omri, How Should DAOs be Regulated? A New Perspective on Decentralization, cit., 4, “technology-
neutral regulation tends to emphasize purpose and function, subject to context and interpretation”. 
65 C. Reed, Taking sides on technology neutrality, cit., 268, who defines future proofing, within the prism of 
technological neutrality, “ in two senses: 1) drafting of laws in a way which is flexible enough not to hinder the future 
development of technology; and 2) achieving sustainability in the sense that the law should not require over-frequent revision to 
cope with technological change”; M. Thompson, The Neutralization of Harmony: The Problem of Technological Neutrality, 
East and West, cit., 308. 
66 B. Greenberg, Rethinking Technology Neutrality, cit., 1495, 1512 “technology neutrality seeks to promote a statute's 
longevity - that is, to future -proof the law. The more technology specific a law is, the more difficult adapting to unforeseen 
technologies would seem to be (…) Technology neutrality attempts to invert the consequences of specificity; it presumes that laws 
untethered to specific technologies will be less disrupted by technological turbulence. Rather than force the law to struggle  with 
new technologies, and in the interest of sparing legislators the time -consuming effort of frequent revisions, technology neutrality 
attempts to avoid ossification by making a statute more adaptable to technological advances. It does so through broad, open - 
textured terms”. 
 106 
too rooted in a specific technological design may rapidly obsolesce as the market evolves and/or 
the underlying technological architecture changes.67  
Furthermore, when it comes to a regulation that imposes substantive burdens – as the anti-money 
laundering one – it is argued that, if a regulation focuses on a specific technology, it may have a 
counterproductive effect. On the one hand, it may scare investors and developers away from that 
technology, this way hampering its development. On the other hand, designers may adopt minor 
manipulations to the technological architecture so to avoid the regulation by falling out of its scope. 
This way the Regulator would be stuck playing whack-a-mole with every single innovation. 
We will return to the validity of th is rationale in the next sections. First, we need to analyse the 
second definition provided by the FATF. Namely, as the two definitions are rooted in a similar 
strategic approach, we can condense the critique in a single section.  
 
1.2 From virtual currency to virtual asset. Same old, same old? 
 
The first definition adopted by the FATF was short lived. Only three years after its introduction  
the FATF amended its glossary and introduced a new definition. The expression chosen in 2018 
was “virtual asset”.  
A virtual asset is defined as a: 
“digital representation of value that can be digitally traded, or transferred, and can be used for payment or 
investment purposes. Virtual assets do not include digital representations of fiat currencies, securities and other 
financial assets that are already covered elsewhere in the FATF Recommendations”.68 
The definition of 2018 does not fundamentally modify the previous policy strategy. Rather, it 
simply moves away from the currency centric approach of 2015 in favour of a broader vision of 
crypto-assets. Sign of the shift is, first and foremost, the substitution of the term “currency” with 
 
67 A. Veerpalu – E. da Cruz Rodrigues e Silva, Hitting the White Ball: The Technology Neutrality Principle and 
Blockchain-Based Applications in The Indian Journal of Law and Technology, 15,2, 2019, 304.  
68 Financial Action Task Force, Glossary: Virtual Asset, https://www.fatf-gafi.org/glossary/u-z/ 
 107 
the more neutral “asset”. Furthermore, the FATF abandons the previous definition rooted in the 
three traditional functions of the currency (means of exchange, unit of account, store of value) in 
favour of a more generic reference to the fact virtual assets should be used as a means of payment 
and/or investment.  
This change in the policy strategy is due to political and historical reasons. 
Starting from the latter, if in 2014 the crypto market was mainly constituted by Bitcoin, the market 
in 2019 was a whole different story. The introduction of Ethereum, precisely in 201 5, breathed 
new life into blockchain’s evolution. Ethereum is rooted in the same infrastructure as Bitcoin – a 
public, permissionless blockchain – but is a multi -purpose platform. It allows developers to use 
decentralized consensus as a means to achieve much more than just exchanges of values among 
users.69 This expansion in the perception regarding what crypto -assets can do, spurred the 
development of new technological categories .70 Since then, the number of implementations and 
blockchain infrastructures has multiplied with some building on top of Ethereum (so-called Layer 
Two solutions) and other proposing alternatives to this primigenial model.  
As the scope of the crypto-market grew so did its criminal applications. The introduction of Initial 
Coin Offerings (ICO)71 as a means to gather seed funds by start-ups created new opportunities for 
fraud and money laundering.72 The quite spectacular failure of the DAO project73 underlined that 
a large amount of funds could be attracted by exotic crypto opportunities to then (magically) 
 
69 G. Hileman – M. Rauchs, 2017 global cryptocurrency benchmarking study, cit., 15; this evolution in the purpose 
of crypto-assets was also underlined by the European Banking Authority in European Banking Authority, 
Report with advice for the European Commission on Crypto -assets, cit., 6, “Today their use extends well beyond tokens for 
payment-type purposes (the VCs, sometimes also referred to as crypto -currencies or ‘payment/exchange’ tokens) to include 
‘investment’ or ‘security’ tokens representing debt or equity claims on the issuer and ‘utility’ tokens used to provide access to 
applications or services (commonly involving DLT)”. 
70 European Banking Authority, Report with Advice for the European Commission on Crypto‐assets, cit., 6, “The use 
of crypto-assets, which depend primarily on cryptography and distributed ledger technology (DLT), has evolved rapidly in the 
last couple of years. Today their use extends well beyond tokens for payment -type purposes (the VCs, sometimes also referred 
to as crypto -currencies or ‘payment/exchange’ tokens) to include ‘investment’ or ‘security’ tokens representing debt or equity 
claims on the issuer and ‘utility’ tokens used to provide access to applications or services (commonly involving DLT)”. 
71 A. Delivorias, Understanding initial coin offerings. A new means of raising funds based on blockchain, cit., see also 
the dedicated website by the US Security and Exchange Commission, https://www.sec.gov/ICO; L. Haffke 
– M. Fromberger – P. Zimmermann, Cryptocurrencies and anti-money laundering: the shortcomings of the fifth AML 
Directive (EU) and how to address them, cit., 127. 
72 For an analysis of ICO -related frauds see L. Hornuf – T. Kück – A. Schwienbacher, Initial coin offerings, 
information disclosure, and fraud in Small Business Economics, 4, 2022; Europol, Internet Organized Crime Threat 
Assessment, cit., 14; Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and 
Virtual Asset Service Providers, cit., 30-31. 
73 For a description of this project and of its failure, see Chapter 1, paragraph 3.2. 
 108 
disappear. Most recently, the skyrocketing value of collectible Non -Fungible Tokens (NFTs) 
showed that the role of crypto-assets in the money laundering cycle was much larger and complex 
than that underscored by Bitcoin or cryptocurrencies.74  
In sum, from the decentralized means of exchange free from the yoke of intermediaries envisioned 
by Nakamoto, crypto -assets had, at least partially, moved towards a high -risk 
investment/speculative asset.75 This shift was correctly perceived by the FATF that translated it in 
its definition. The “virtual currency” became a “virtual asset” and, between the functions this asset 
could play, payment was coupled with investment. 
While the FATF’s move certainly resulted from the evolution of the market, there is also a political 
factor that played a part. The exponential growth of the crypto -market alarmed regulators and 
Central Banks worldwide. These entities saw crypto-assets as a potential competitor in the money 
market and as a systemic risk for consumers and investors. The use of the term currency, in 
particular, was perceived as misleading as it associated crypto -assets and fiat currencies by 
generating the wrong perception th e two shared a similar risk profile. 76 Also, the use of the term 
currency, especially by official sources, was seen as a sort of legitimization of cryptocurrencies. 
Central Banks – who had themselves initially adopted the term “currency” – started advocating to 
move away from the concept of cu rrency towards the more neutral one of asset. 77 This lobbying 
activity was highly successful as the term currency effectively disappeared from the regulatory lingo 
in favour of the term asset.  
 
74 On the connection between NFTs and money laundering see Chainalysis, The 2022 Cryptocrime Report, cit., 
35; A. Mosna – G. Soana, When art goes virtual: what status for collectible NFTs under the current EU Anti Money -
Laundering regime?, in Eu Law Analysis, 13th of August 2022, 
http://eulawanalysis.blogspot.com/2022/08/when-art-goes-virtual-what-status-for.html  
75 W. Bolt – V. Lubbersen – P. Wierts, Getting the balance right: Crypto, stablecoin and central bank digital currency, 
cit., 42. 
76 European Central Bank, Opinion of the European Central Bank on a proposal for a directive and a regulation on the 
prevention of the use of the financial system for the purposes of money laundering or terrorist financing , 16 February 2022, 
14, “AMLR1 replaces the term ‘virtual currencies’, which was introduced into Directive (EU) 2015/849 by Directive (EU) 
2018/84370, with the term ‘crypto -assets’. The ECB welcomes this change, as the term ‘virtual currencies’ could lead to 
misperceptions as to the nature of those types of assets, which are not currencies”. 
77 See the remarks by Bank of England’s Governor, M. Carney, The Future of Money, cit., 9., “cryptocurrencies 
are of growing interest to policymakers, many of whom prefer to term them crypto -assets expressly because they are not true 
currencies — a convention I will adopt for the balance of my remarks ”; the same goes for the remarks of the then 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy (now ECB board member) P. Panetta, Crypto-assets or virtual currencies 
as they were called before it was realized that they cannot perform the functions of money , cit., 2; this change can also be 
inferred from the change in the naming by Public Authorities, see the EBA that in 2014 titled its report, 
Opinion on Virtual Currency to shift, in 2019, to the term crypto-assets.  
 109 
Having analysed the roots of this definition, let’s shift to the analysis of its content. 
Although partially different, this second definition does not fundamentally alter the policy 
approach adopted in 2015. Apart from the, certainly appropriate, shift from a currency -centric 
approach to a multipurpose one – also underlined by the elimination of the reference to the unit 
of account and store of value function – the strategy adopted in 2015 is fully reiterated.  
The new definition does not restrict or customize in any way the scope of the legislation. Quite 
the opposite, the previous definition restricted its scope only to a very specific category of assets: 
currencies that were privately issued in a digital form. In contrast, the current definition creates an 
amorphous category that encompasses any digital token that has two characteristics: one, can be 
digitally traded and, two, can be used for payment or investment purposes. The only real limit to 
this potentially all-encompassing category is that virtual assets should not be regulated elsewhere 
by the FATF Recommendations.  
In brief, under the definition of 2018, virtual assets become a residual category that includes any 
digital token not otherwise regulated. It is clear that, with such a definition, customization becomes 
extremely complex. Namely, even drawing ex-ante the boundaries of what constitutes a virtual asset 
is exceedingly difficult.  
 
1.3 Missing the target. A critique of the FATF approach 
 
Now that we have analysed the fundamental elements of the FATF’s first and second definition, 
we can draw some initial conclusions.  
In brief, these two definitions encompass all those assets that share three characteristics: they have 
a digital form, are digitally tradeable, and are used for payment or investment purposes. In this 
sense, the FATF’s Guidance is, at least prima facie , completely decoupled from any underlying 
technological consideration.  
 110 
The main shortcoming of this approach is that, as analysed above, blockchain poses a 
fundamentally new challenge to the anti -money laundering legislation compared to traditional 
electronic value exchange systems. It can be argued  that a system like Bitcoin can hardly  be 
equated, in terms of anti -money laundering risk, to a token that is issued and governed by a 
centralized authority – be it a private or public entity.78 If the risk is qualitatively different so should 
the connected mitigating measures.  
This need for customization based on the risk factor is in line with the fundamental principle 
underlying the anti -money laundering regulation: the risk -based approach. 79 The risk -based 
approach requires regulators, supervisors, and covered entities to customize their actions to the 
specific risk identified. Eminently, the anti -money laundering regulation is not envisioned as a 
monolithic, rigid regulation. Rather, as a flexible instrument to be adapted to the multifaced 
characteristics of the connected phenomenon.  80 In this sense, given the different risk s posed by 
crypto-assets such a principle calls for an approach that embraces rather than rejects the difference. 
The FATF’s equation of centralized and decentralized assets seems to miss such a different risk 
factor.  
To put it plainly, you cannot use the same weapon to hunt a lion or a shark.  
This qualitative difference in terms of risk factor between centralized and decentralized networks 
is well depicted by a case occurred just a couple of years before Bitcoin came into the picture: 
Liberty Reserve.81  
Liberty Reserve was a Costa Rica -based money transmission service that offered its products 
through a native currency – the Liberty Dollar. Due to the lack of anti -money laundering checks 
 
78 The different risk generated by decentralized assets compared to centralized one is highlighted by the 
same FATF that in its Guidance of 2015 states “When assessing the ML/ TF risk of convertible VC, the distinction 
between centralised and decentralised VC will be one key aspect. Due to anonymity and the challenges to conduct a proper 
identification of the participant, convertible decentralised VCPPSs in general may be regarded of higher risk of ML/FT which 
would require the application of enhanced due diligence measures ”, Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk -
based approach. Virtual Currencies, cit., 8. 
79 For more on the risk-based approach see chapter 4 section 2.1 
80 M. Bergström, The Global AML Regime and the EU AML Directives: Prevention and Control, cit., 39. 
81 Interestingly this case is mentioned  by the first FATF Guidance. However, the structural differences 
between Liberty Reserve and Bitcoin are not underlined nor explored, see Financial Action Task Force, 
Virtual Currencies. Key definitions and potential AML/CFT risks, cit., 10. 
 111 
– especially in terms of customer identification 82 – the Liberty Dollar became a safe haven for 
international criminal transactions. Criminals could exchange illicit proceeds into Liberty Dollars 
and send them globally to their partners or use the currency as a way to blur the money trail. It is 
estimated that, during its operating period, Liberty Reserve processed more than eight billion 
dollars in transactions.83 The service came to a brutal halt in 2013 when United States enforcement 
authorities arrested Liberty Reserves’ founder and successfully downed the system.84  
It is precisely the demise of Liberty Reserve that underlines the qualitative difference between a 
centralized virtual currency and a decentralized one. Enforcement actions such as those carried 
out in the Liberty Reserve case – i.e., arresting the adminis trators and shutting off the website – 
would not be feasible with crypto-assets.  
This both from a technical and a legal perspective.  
From a technical perspective, crypto -assets are rooted in a decentralized network of mutually 
distrustful nodes. In this sense, blockchain governance, at least in its permissionless form, does 
not depend on any centralized entity. Rather, it is based on the cooperation of a network of nodes 
acting according to the fundamental law of the blockchain – i.e., its underlying code. This means 
that these types of network keeps functioning as long as at least one of its nodes is online.85 If the 
nodes are scattered across the globe and belong to different entities and/or individuals, it is 
extremely complex, if not impossible, for a State to single -handedly disrupt it. With blockchain, 
unilateral action – as the one used against Liberty Reserve – cannot simply target one entity.86 To 
successfully down the network it is necessary to target all the entities controlling each and every 
node in a nearly simultaneous fashion.  
 
82 While certain identification measures were implemented, they were far from being effective as no 
validation mechanism was put in place, with accounts established under clearly false names as “John 
Bogus”, “Hacker Account”, see Financial Action Task Force,  Virtual Currencies. Key definitions and potential 
AML/CFT risks, cit., 10.  
83 D. Carlisle, Virtual currencies and financial crime: Challenges and opportunities, cit., 15. 
84 See, United States Department of Justice, Liberty Reserve Founder Sentenced to 20 Years For Laundering 
Hundreds of Millions of Dollars , 6 th May 2006, https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/liberty-reserve-founder-
sentenced-20-years-laundering-hundreds-millions-dollars  
85 I. Karasek -Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering instruments and European data protection 
requirements in permissionless blockchain space, cit., 19. 
86 See Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual Currencies, cit., 11, “law enforcement 
cannot target one central location or entity for investigative purposes”. 
 112 
From a legal perspective, a (truly) decentralized governance model means no  one is squarely in 
charge of the network’s management. Individual responsibility and choices may, therefore, be hard 
to ascertain in these cases.  
In a centralized network, individual responsibility is relatively easy to ascertain. When it comes to 
these networks, criminal prosecution  is mostly a matter of reach: the main question for the 
enforcement authorities is if the individual/s managing the network are within their reach. If this 
is the case, then they can be arrested, and traditional prosecution follows. Going back to our 
example, with Liberty Reserve it was clear who was in charge of the network and enabled illicit 
transactions. While exotic, the actions of Liberty Reserves’ executives clearly fall in the traditional 
framework of money laundering. Prosecution was, hence, relatively straightforward, once the 
individuals were materially apprehended. 
In contrast, in a permissionless blockchain network, even though many entities contribute to its 
functioning – nodes, miners, developers, etc. – none of them really controls it. All these entities 
act according to the underlying code, and none of them can unilaterally modify it.87 For this reason, 
it would be arguably complex to charge one of the abovementioned entities 88 for not properly 
identifying Bitcoin users, as happened with Liberty Reserve’s executives. No entity in a blockchain 
network could unilaterally impose identification duties: the non -identification rule is determined 
by the code itself, to which all networ k participants must abide. In a decentralized network , all 
participants are (at least formally) equal and none of them can unilaterally control or impose 
anything on others. If this was not so, the same concept of decentralization would be refuted. 
There is only one entity whose action could be considered causal to the way the system works: its 
initial creator, the person/s that designed the technological architecture and wrote the code.89 This 
is, probably, one of the reasons why Nakamoto, the creator of Bitcoin, never revealed their identity. 
In brief, the main risk posed by crypto -assets to the anti-money laundering infrastructure is new 
and specific to these ecosystems as it is connected to blockchain’s governance structure: the 
 
87 I. Karasek -Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering instruments and European data protection 
requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces, cit., 16. 
88 World Economic Forum, Decentralized Finance (DeFi) Policymaker Toolkit, cit., 18,  
89 Such a technological reality has opened a debate regarding whether developers of crypto -assets and 
decentralized applications should be qualified as covered entities under the anti -money laundering 
regulation. For more see chapter 5, section 3. 
 113 
creation of a truly decentralized value exchange system, rooted in cryptography, enabling peer-to-
peer transactions.90  
In blockchain environments, no one is in control of the infrastructure or the access/exit points. 
This challenges the traditional financial flows control strategy rooted in intermediaries. In contrast, 
a centrally issued and governed private digital asset/currency does not pose any new or specific 
problem. In centralized ecosystems, there is an entity – the issuer – that can be potentially 
controlled and be subject to anti -money laundering obligations. The only problem in these cases 
is whether the enforcement agency can  concretely implement the legislative command. This is, 
however, a classic problem of cybercrime legislation and in no way new or specific to virtual 
currencies. In a global and dematerialized environment, the State does not always have the political 
and economic power to reach and coerce individuals or, alternatively, shield its system from them. 
When it comes to privately issued assets, centralization eliminates the main risk posed by 
blockchain to anti-money laundering governance: the lack of a centraliz ed point of pressure that 
can be targeted by the policy maker. 
Equating centralized and decentralized assets is, thus, mixing apples and oranges, at least from an 
anti-money laundering perspective. 91 The choice of linking the regulation of these two assets, 
through a common definition, is crucial as it reverberates in the whole regulatory strategy. If 
crypto-assets are associated with centralized asset s, then the pre -existing regulatory strategy is 
conceivably extended to them. This association between the two assets at the definitory level can 
be regarded as the “original sin” of the sectorial regulation. Eminently, by equating traditional and 
new assets, it has hampered the creation of a regulatory strategy that could specifically address, 
and exploit, the peculiarities of blockchain’s governance structure. 
Up until now our critique has been essentially rooted in an empirical comparison between 
centralized and decentralized assets. However, to fully analyse the strategy adopted by the FATF 
 
90 D. Carlisle, Virtual currencies and financial crime: Challenges and opportunities, cit., 13 
91 As underlined by K. Fatjon – E. Martino – A. M. Pacces, fintech and The Law and Economics of 
Disintermediation, cit., 9 “ Several central banks are experimenting with digital currencies. This is a way to exploit the 
promise of the blockchain in terms of management of money supply and efficiency of settlements, while maintaining the role of  
central banks as gatekeeper of money  and monetary policy. Libra and government -controlled digital currencies could scale up 
in the coming years. Nevertheless, these projects hardly imply disintermediation of money and payments, as governments are 
either directly involved or require intermediaries to have a license in order to convert digital into traditional currencies. Rather, 
these projects change the way money and payments are intermediated, exploiting the blockchain”. 
 114 
in its definition, we need to go back to its ideological driving forces and examine whether those 
premises are reasonable and have been reasonably applied in the case at hand.  
As examined in the previous paragraph, technological neutrality is certainly one of the driving 
forces, if not the driving force, of this legislative approach. Let’s then delve into how this principle 
applies to the situation at hand. It is, in particular,  appropriate to question whether this principle 
should always be the fundamental parameter driving the policymaker.  
Critiques to technological neutrality have already surfaced in the literature. 92 Reed93 notes that a 
blanket application of the principle of technological neutrality can generate over -generic 
regulations. Escudero-Pascual and Hosein94 underline how technological neutrality can be used as 
an excuse by the legislator to avoid addressing technologically specific challenges. 95 On that note, 
Thompson argues that technological neutrality impedes to address crucial socio-political problems 
by narrowing the scope of the legislative action.96  
A part of the literature, thus, suggests that technological neutrality should not be a rule carved in 
stone but one to be adopted when necessary and in the measure necessary. 97 In certain occasions 
a technology specific regulation may be appropriate to implement solutions that better address the 
problem at hand. 98 Greenberg, in particular, proposes to adopt technological discrimination 
 
92 C. Azar – B. A. Sandén, The elusive quest for technology -neutral policies in Environmental Innovation and Societal 
Transitions, 1/1, 2011; M. Thompson, The Neutralization of Harmony: The Problem of Technological Neutrality, East 
and West, cit.; B. Greenberg, Rethinking Technology Neutrality, cit., 2016, 100.  
93 C. Reed, C., Taking sides on technology neutrality, cit., 282, “technology neutral regulation cannot be very specific about 
the subject matter which it regulates”, on a similar note M. Thompson, The Neutralization of Harmony: The Problem 
of Technological Neutrality, East and West , cit., 308 - 310, sees technological neutrality as expressing a general 
principle of legislative vagueness. 
94 See the discussion by A. Escudero-Pascual – I. Hosein, Questioning lawful access to traffic data, cit., 78 of how 
technology neutral language hinders the protection of individual rights, due to a lack of specification in 
terms of the quality of data processed, when it comes to law enforcement’s access to traffic data.   
95 A. Escudero-Pascual – I. Hosein, Questioning lawful access to traffic data, cit., 78. “technology-neutral language may 
be used to ignore the challenges and risks to applying powers to different infrastructures”. 
96 M. Thompson, The Neutralization of Harmony: The Problem of Technological Neutrality, East and West, cit., 314, 
“If law is to address these problems, it will need to choose between different possible technological models and do so by regulating 
technological artifacts themselves through properties other than their functions. The vagueness principle, however, restrains such 
choices by directing the law to focus only on the functions of technological artifacts”. 
97 B. Greenberg, Rethinking Technology Neutrality, cit., 1547. 
98 C. Reed, C., Taking sides on technology neutrality, cit., 283-284; as underlined by B. Greenberg, Rethinking 
Technology Neutrality, cit., 1498, “technological discrimination sometimes enhances social welfare (…) Conversely, technology 
specificity has unappreciated bene- fits. By embracing the need for more frequent updates, technology-specific laws can be drafted 
more carefully than technology - neutral laws and be coupled with judicial tools and regulatory processes that help technology -
specific laws achieve the policy goals of technology neutrality, and without the costs”.  
 115 
instead of technological neutrality.99 In his opinion, this would help generating customized 
solutions that address the specific problems posed by each specific technology.  
All of these critiques resonate when it comes to crypto -asset regulation. The legislative equation 
of centralized and decentralized assets creates an over-generic regulation that does not address the 
challenges specifically posed by blockchain to financial flows monitoring. At the same time, 
through this equati on, the policy maker avoids facing the fissure opened by crypto -assets in the 
financial monitoring infrastructure. This way failing to innovate and revise its traditional approach. 
This is a comfortable choice, hardly an effective one. 
Digging deeper, there is a systemic reason why an anti -money laundering regulation addressing 
blockchain should be customized to its underlying logic. Blockchain, rather than a new technology, 
meaning an instrument or technique that allows to perform a cer tain activity in a new form, is a 
class of technologies united by a common logic. It is this logic – the possibility for a digital network 
to reach consensus without needing a central authority – that constitutes the true innovation 
purported by blockchain. Based on this fundamental logic, a whole new batch of implementations 
has surfaced – from currencies, to digital art, to autonomous contracts and organizations.  
In this sense, blockchain proposes an alternative rationale in the structure of data storage and 
management. One that changes the fundamental approach to governance and challenges the pre -
existing regulatory strategy 100 in the field of anti -money laundering. With such a fundamental 
innovation, customization should be warranted.101  
As stated by Greenberg with regard to the regulation of the Internet: 
 
99 B. Greenberg, Rethinking Technology Neutrality, cit., 1547. 
100 Banca d’Italia, Comunicazione della Banca d’Italia in materia di tecnologie decentralizzate nella finanza e cripto-attività, 
cit., 7, “ Tale rilevanza della componente tecnologica e degli stessi fornitori di tecnologia realizza una sorta di “governance 
algoritmica” che scardina gli schemi di governo tradizionali e della quale è necessario tenere conto”. 
101 H. Axelsen – J. Jensen – R. Omri, When is a DAO Decentralized? , cit., 69, " The concept of technology -neutral 
regulation is challenged by DLT/Blockchain. DAOs exist and realize benefits through increasing degrees of decentralization. 
DAO legal design should therefore support the internal decentralization accomplished by the DAO so  that a balance is 
achieved between external and internal decentralization [11], not the other way around. When regulators in the coming years 
design technical requirements for the supervision of DAOs, they need to acknowledge this underlying premise and embrace that 
DLT/blockchain is a transformative technology that requires unique regulatory approaches”. 
 116 
“The Internet, like the combustion engine to the farmer, is a technological discontinuity - a rapid spike on the 
timeline of innovation that moves the future of technology onto a new plane. And the principles underlying the law, 
whether technology specific or neutral, are disrupted”.102 
The disruption of the principles underlying the law, operated by a paradigm shifting technology, 
cannot be addressed through the simple extension of the previous legislation. Rather, it is a change 
that calls for new, customized, solutions and strategies.  
In short, if the absence of intermediaries and governance centres in blockchain infrastructures is 
not addressed, the blanket will always be too short. The legislation needs to face and address this 
absence and it cannot do that if it treats centralized and decentralized infrastructures in the same 
way. 
The regulator has chosen a technologically neutral definition to avoid playing whack -a-mole with 
crypto-assets. What it seems to have missed is that the only mole to whack (at least in the financial 
flows control debate) is the blockchain. The whole “crypto risk” is intimately connected with 
blockchain’s governance structure; without it, the risk morphs in such a drastic way that it is not 
regulable in a comparable way.  
Every part  destruens needs a part construens. What should be, then, a definition that, while being 
general enough to be future proof could still allow the legislator to address the new challenges 
decentralized governance generates?  
We will come back to this argument in a few pages, but first let’s continue our analysis of the 
legislative saga.  
 
2. The European Dimension 
 
 
102 B. Greenberg, Rethinking Technology Neutrality, cit., 1527. 
 117 
The FATF was the first to provide a legislative response to the emerging crisis posed by crypto-
assets. A response that anticipated and paved the way to National legislations. However, the soft 
law status of FATF’s Guidances meant that, for concrete implementation, national law was needed. 
At the Union’s level, such a hard law response came in 2018 , three years after the first FATF’s 
Guidance. Precisely when the FATF was revising its approach to crypto -assets regulation by 
introducing the new definition of “virtual asset”.  
The European Union’s definition – provided by Directive n. 843 of 2018  (so-called Fifth Anti-
money Laundering Directive) 103 – is one that, hence, mixes elements of the FATF’s first and 
second definition. With this first definition, the European Union completely followed the FATF’s 
definitory strategy both in approach and content. 
This initial consistency between the FATF and European legislation lasted until 2023 with the 
introduction of the first comprehensive Regulation of the crypto -assets market – the Market in 
Crypto-assets Regulation (MiCaR). With this piece of legislation, the E uropean Union distances 
itself from the FATF’s approach. The MiCaR expressly focuses on decentralized assets and, hence, 
aims at providing a legislative framework customized to crypto -assets and the specificity of their 
governance model. Although not an anti -money laundering regulation per se, the definition 
provided by the MiCaR is referenced by all the pieces of legislation that compose the Anti-money 
Laundering Package whose introduction is planned in 2024, making it paramount for any study in 
the field.  
With the introduction of a definition of crypto -asset, one that directly addresses decentralized 
technologies, the Union aims at pursuing an independent strategy in the regulation of crypto-assets 
one customized, at least in theory, to their characteristics. 
 
2.1 The first definition. The Fifth Anti-money Laundering Directive  
 
 
103 Directive of the European Union, 30th May 2018, n. 843 
 118 
At the European level, the in -force anti-money laundering legislation disciplining crypto -assets is 
Directive no. 843 of 2018. This Directive was initially thought as a means to implement the FATF’s 
Guidance of 2015. However, the introduction of this legislation coincided with a turning point in 
the FATF’s strategy. In 2018, when the Directive was being approved, th e FATF was already 
partially revising its approach with the amendment of its glossary and the second Guidance on 
virtual assets of 2019.  
Probably due to this specific timing, the definition provided by the Directive constitutes somewhat 
of a combination of the first and the second definition of the FATF. In particular, art icle 3, 
paragraph 2, letter d, point  18, of the Directive cho oses the term “virtual currency” but then 
introduces a somewhat broader definition than that used by the first FATF Guidance. A definition 
that partially resembles the second FATF’s definition of “virtual asset”. 
Under Directive n. 843 of 2018, a “virtual currency” is defined as: 
“a digital representation of value that is not issued or guaranteed by a central 
bank or a public authority, is not necessarily attached to a legally established currency and does not possess a legal 
status of currency or money, but is accepted by natural or legal persons as a means of exchange and which can be 
transferred, stored, and traded electronically”. 
Building upon the critique developed in the previous section we can appreciate how this definition 
presents similar problems as the FATF’s ones. Compared to the first FATF definition this one is 
somewhat broader and less currency specific – in this sense, it is more similar to the second 
definition of virtual asset. Eminently, the Directive abandons the reference to the store of value 
and unit of account function s. At the same time, compared to the second FATF’s definition of 
virtual asset, it is more curre ncy specific as underlined by both the use of the term currency and 
the reference solely to the means of exchange function and not to the investment one.104  
This textual restriction paves the way for two opposing interpretations.  
 
104 At the same time recital 9 of the Directive seems to contrast with the letter of the law and expands the 
scope of the Directive beyond the monetary function as it states “although virtual currencies can frequently be used 
as a means of payment, they could also be used for other purposes and find broader applications such as means of exchange, 
investment, store-of-value products or use in online casinos. The objective of thi s Directive is to cover all the potential uses of 
virtual currencies”; on the meaning of the expression means of exchange and for a critique to recital 9 see L. 
Haffke – M. Fromberger – P. Zimmermann, Cryptocurrencies and anti-money laundering: the shortcomings of the fifth 
AML Directive (EU) and how to address them, cit., 132. 
 119 
A strict textual interpretation would subsume under the anti-money laundering compliance duties, 
only currency tokens. This interpretation reads the “means of exchange” expression as a reference 
to the three functions of the currency. In this sense, a virtual currency is only that which is used as 
an intermediary asset to exchange goods without any interest of the trader in the use or 
consumption of the virtual currency.105 This interpretation finds a textual anchor in the use of the 
term currency to identify these tokens. The use of this term to frame crypto-assets suggests a 
connection between the means of exchange function and the theory of the currency.  
Such a restrictive interpretation  would, however, menace the effectiveness of the Directive.  
Considering the conformation of the market, excluding investment tokens from its purview would 
restrict its application to a, mostly obsolete, conception of crypto-assets.  
A second broader interpretation would subsume under the definition of article 3 all tokens that 
are used as a medium in an exchange. This interpretation would hence also include investment 
tokens. To support this reading three arguments can be used. First, a textual one. Recital 10 of the 
Directive states: 
“Although virtual currencies can frequently be used as a means of payment, they could also be used for other 
purposes and find broader applications such as means of exchange, investment, store-of-value products or use in 
online casinos. The objective of this Directive is to cover all the potential uses of virtual currencies”. 
Second, the broader interpretation would be in line with the aim of the E uropean Union to 
conform to FATF’s standards. As underlined by the same Directive 106 and by the legislator’s 
statement, the European anti-money laundering infrastructure  is informed by the FATF’s 
guidance. The Guidance  is seen as a fundamental point of reference. In this sense, the updated 
Guidance and definition of virtual asset could be used as an external interpretative means to clarify 
the scope of the Directive and include non-currency tokens.  
This second interpretation seems to, hence, be more appropriate if a broader perspective is taken.  
However, going back to our previous  distinction among centralized and decentralized 
arrangements, the Directive does not seem to  innovate or ameliorate in any significant way the 
 
105 L. Haffke – M. Fromberger – P. Zimmermann, Cryptocurrencies and anti-money laundering: the shortcomings of 
the fifth AML Directive (EU) and how to address them, cit., 131. 
106 See the frequent reference made to the FATF’s Standard by the Directive at e.g., recital 4 and 12. 
 120 
pre-existing FATF’s definitory strategy. The definition crystalized by the Fifth Directive is as 
generic in terms of underlying technology or governance structure. In this sense, it equally fails to 
focus on the elements that characterize crypto-assets and/or their specific risks. We can, thus, fully 
refer to the analysis developed in the previous section.  
 
2.2 A new European approach. The Market in Crypto -assets 
Regulation 
 
The last definition we will analyse is fresh out of the regulatory box.  
Introduced in 202 3, the Market in Crypto -assets Regulation (MiCaR), 107 aims at becoming the 
European (and possibly global) gold standard for the regulation of crypto-assets.108  
The MiCaR constitutes the key piece in the growing body of European legislations devoted to 
crypto-assets. The MiCaR was initially proposed in 2020 as part of the Digital Financial Package.109 
However, its introduction gained increasing momentum in the years following. The causes 
underlying such an increased regulatory momentum are multifaced. On the one hand, the crypto-
winter of 2021/2022 made the crypto -market too big to ignore. 110 The failure of exchangers as 
 
107 Regulation of the European Union, 31st May 2023, n. 1114. For a more detailed analysis of this regulation 
and of its fundamental provisions please see the section devoted to MiCAR in Chapter 4, section 3. 
108 A. Ferreira – P. Sandner, Eu search for regulatory answers to crypto assets and their place in the financial markets’ 
infrastructure, cit., 3. The Market in Crypto -assets Regulation is part of the Digital Financial Package 
presented by the European Commission in September 2020. Explicit aim of this Package is “ paving the way 
for Europe to become a global standard -setter” in line with the ambitions of the EU to be able to further expand 
its so-called “Brussels effect”. See European Commission, Digital Finance Package: Commission sets out new, 
ambitious approach to encourage responsible innovation to benefit consumers and businesses (Press Release), 24 September 
2020, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_20_1684 and G. Maia – J. Vieira dos 
Santos, MiCA and DeFi ('Proposal for a Regulation on Market in Crypto -Assets' and'Decentralised Finance'),  
Forthcoming article in" Blockchain and the law: dynamics and dogmatism, current and future , 2021, 2, on the Brussels 
effect see A. Bradford, The brussels effect, cit., 1. More on this Package D. Zetzsche – F. Annunziata – W. 
Douglas - R. P. Buckley, The Markets in Crypto -Assets regulation (MiCA) and the EU digital finance strategy  in 
Capital Markets Law Journal, 16.2, 2021, 203-204. 
109 For more on the Package see European Commission, Digital Financial Package, Press Release, 24 th 
September 2020, https://finance.ec.europa.eu/publications/digital-finance-package_en. 
110 E. Martino, Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional comparative 
analysis, cit., 8; for a description of this period and its effects see G. Gorton – J. Zhang, Bank Runs During 
Crypto Winter, in University of Michigan Law & Econ Research Paper, 2023. 
 121 
FTX and stable coins as Terra Luna caused an aggregated loss of billions of dollars. 111 The losses 
are also alleged to have had spill -over effects in the traditional market, with failures menacing 
regional and global economic stability. 112 On the other hand, the criminal risk connected with 
crypto-assets has reached geopolitical dimensions. Crypto -assets are increasingly identified as 
facilitators for sanctions circumvention and state-sponsored acts of cybercrime.113   
If the legislative goal is shared, at least among Western Countries, the strategies differ. The United 
States has, so  far, primarily adopted a regulation -through-enforcement approach. 114 Financial 
supervisors commenced a series of actions against crypto-companies under the same activity, same 
risk, same regulation standard. In contrast, the European Union has devised a body of regulations 
customised to crypto -assets. The Market in Crypto -assets Regulation (MiCaR), the DLT Pilot 
Regime, and the Travel Rule Regulation are all part of the same strategy. The idea is to create a 
clear playing field to foster the safe development of the crypto-market.115 In this sense, the MiCaR 
provides for a comprehensive framework to police crypto-asset offerings and service providers. 
This piece of legislation is not an anti-money laundering policy per se. Quite the opposite: MiCaR 
solely covers aspects connected with the protection of the market and its customers and is 
explicitly framed as a financial regulation. The definition bore by MiCaR is, however, of direct 
relevance for the anti-money laundering strategy. In compliance with the Commission’s ambition 
 
111 E. McCaul, Mind the gap: we need better oversight of crypto activities , cit., 
https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/press/blog/2023/html/ssm.blog230405~03fd3d664f.en.ht
ml  
112 Examples of such spill over being the failure of the three US banks, SVB, Silvergate Bank and Signature 
Bank, E. McCaul, Mind the gap: we need better oversight of crypto activities , cit.; see also E. Martino, Comparative 
Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional comparative analysis, cit., 8; for a contrasting 
view G. Gorton – J. Zhang, Bank Runs During Crypto Winter, cit., 20 that argue the current crisis didn’t have 
a spill over effect due to crypto-lending circularity, but that the next crypto -crisis will probably have such 
spill over effects due to a modification in the crypto -companies’ business model, “ what happened in crypto 
space largely stayed in crypto space. But that might not be the case going forward. The next generation of crypto innovations  
are becoming “interoperable” with the real economy —that is, facilitating financial transactions in the rea l world, not just in 
crypto space”. 
113 European Banking Authority, Opinion of the European Banking Authority on money laundering and terrorist 
financing risks affecting the EU’s financial sector, Paris, 2023, 95. 
114 T. A. Moffett, CFTC & SEC: The Wild West of Cryptocurrency Regulation, U. Rich. L. Rev., 52, 2022, 713, E. 
Martino, Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional comparative analysis, cit., 
13. 
115 A. Minto, The legal characterization of crypto-exchange platforms, cit., 139; 153, “very few pieces of law are so evocative 
and powerful in shouting out the urgency that justified them. And very few pieces of law open setting out that “the first objective 
is one of legal certainty”. The European Commission overtly account for other goals,  such as “supporting innovation and 
competition”, ensuring “consumer and investor protection”, fostering “market integrity” as well as maintaining “financial 
stability”. Yet, on top of such list of objectives, as if it was a “hierarchy”, legal certainty co mes first and reminds us all how 
pressing the crypto qualification issue is”. 
 122 
for this Regulation to become the cornerstone of the European strategy on crypto -assets, its 
definition is to be applied in all sectors of the European legislation, including anti -money 
laundering. 
For this reason, each piece of legislation composing the upcoming Anti -money Laundering 
Package116 refers to the MiCaR when defining its scope.117 The Travel Rule Regulation,118 the First 
Anti-money Laundering Regulation,119 and the Sixth Anti-money Laundering Directive120 all refer 
in their definitory section to the definition of crypto -asset laid out by MiCaR. The definition of 
crypto-asset is, hence, deemed to become the new gold standard for the anti -money laundering 
regulation in Europe.121  
Let’s, then, analyse the content of the MiCaR’s definition. 
As mentioned, the Regulation revolutionizes the strategy rooted in technological neutrality we have 
analysed so far by introducing, for the first time, a crypto -specific definition.122 This change of 
approach is already apparent from the expression used by the MiCaR to identify the object of its 
regulation: crypto -assets. As underlined above, the shift from the expression “virtual asset” to 
“crypto-asset” is a momentous one as the term “virtual” articulated the decoupling of the 
legislation from blockchain technology. In contrast, for the MiCaR to use the term “crypto” means, 
at least potentially, customizing the legislation to a specific technology, one that has cryptography 
at its core.  
 
116 The Anti-money laundering package, presented by the Commission the 20 th of July 2021, is a series of 
reforms of the anti -money laundering infrastructure (including the institution of an AML European 
authority, an AML Regulation, the Sixth AML Directive, and the Travel Rule Regulation) that aims at 
further standardizing the le gislation at the European level, for more information see 
https://finance.ec.europa.eu/publications/anti-money-laundering-and-countering-financing-terrorism-
legislative-package_en  
117 A. Minto, Riflessioni sull’applicabilità della disciplina antiriciclaggio ai Non-Fungible Tokens (“NFT”), in Rivista di 
Diritto Bancario, 1, 2023, 54. 
118 Regulation of the European Union, 31sr May 2023, n. 1113. 
119 Proposal for a Regulation of the European Union, 20th of July 2021, n. 0239. 
120 Proposal for a Directive of the European Union, 20th of July 2021, n. 0250. 
121 This extension to the AML sector is already stated by the same Regulation; see recital 16 of the MiCaR 
“Any legislative act adopted in the field of crypto -assets should also contribute to the objective of combating money laundering 
and terrorist financing. For that reason, entities offering services falling within the scope of this Regulation should also comply 
with applicable anti -money laundering and counter -terrorist financing rules of the Union, which integrate international 
standards”. 
122 European Central Bank, Opinion of the European Central Bank on a proposal for a directive and a regulation on the 
prevention of the use of the financial system for the purposes of money laundering or terrorist financing, cit., 14. 
 123 
Consequently, article 3, paragraph 1, number 5, of the MiCa Regulation defines crypto-asset as a: 
“a digital representation of a value or of a right that is able to be transferred and stored electronically using 
distributed ledger technology or similar technology”. 
To better refine its scope MiCaR introduces three connected definitions: 
Article 3, paragraph 1, number 1, defines Distributed Ledger Technology: 
“means a technology that enables the operation and use of distributed ledgers”. 
Article 3, paragraph 1, number 2, defines Distributed Ledger as: 
“means an information repository that keeps records of transactions and that is shared across, and synchronised 
between, a set of DLT network nodes using a consensus mechanism”. 
Article 2, paragraph 1, number 3, defines a consensus mechanism as: 
“the rules and procedures by which an agreement is reached, among DLT network nodes, that a transaction is 
validated”. 
The definition of crypto-assets is, hence, based on two pillars.  
First, the identification of the minimum  characteristics a token needs to hold to be qualified as a 
crypto-asset. Second, the definition of the technology a token needs to be rooted in to be qualified 
as a crypto-asset – i.e., Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT).  
 
2.2.1 The definition of the token 
 
Starting from the token, crypto-assets inherit some elements of the previous definitions. As virtual 
assets and virtual currencies, to qualify as a crypto -asset a token has to be digital, and it needs to 
be possible to electronically store and transfer it.  
 124 
Apart from these similarities, the Regulation impresses a decided change of strategy. The definition 
abandons the functionalistic approach that focused on the tokens’ function – payment, investment, 
means of exchange, store of value, etc. Instead, the definition traces its scope by defining what a 
token is.  
Following MiCaR, a crypto -asset can be two things: a digital representation of value or a digital 
representation of a right.  
The concept of a token representing a value was already familiar under the previous legislation: 
for a token to be used for payment or investment, it needs to bear value for the person holding it 
and for the market in general. The MiCaR, in speaking about a digital representation of value, 
simply expands the concept of a digitally tradable value beyond the two functions the definition 
of virtual asset and virtual currency restricted it to.  
This is a welcomed innovation both in terms of market structure and legislative technique. 
In terms of legislative technique, the definition focuses on the common prerequisite that an 
investment and a means of payment share: they are a representation of value. Compared to the 
previous approach, which enumerated every single function of the token, this definition is more 
principle based , hence, flexible. With MiCaR, the legislator does not have to chase each new 
implementation or use, rather it has a general definition that encompasses all possible digital tokens 
that bear a value independently from their use. In terms of anti-money laundering, this is a sensible 
choice as what makes a token significant for money laundering is its economic value. A worthless 
token could hardly be used by criminals to launder, move, or exchange value online.  
In terms of market structure, the definition is well suited to the most recent evolutions of the 
crypto market. The main idea that is emerging is that crypto -assets may become a multi -purpose 
token to incorporate any type of value and then exchange it  peer-to-peer. In this sense, crypto -
assets are perceived as a means to achieve real property of digital assets, one that is full and 
exclusive and not dependent on Internet Service Providers or other intermediaries. Such  a 
tendency is clearly highlighted by their proposed use in the nascent Metaverse. There crypto-assets 
– in the form of NFTs – are being used to incorporate goods – from pieces of virtual land to a 
Gucci bag. In this sense, a definition that focuses on what a crypto-asset is – a digital representation 
of value – rather than what it does will make the MiCaR comparatively more future proof and 
avoid continuous amendments of the legislation. 
 125 
More problematic is the clear identification of the meaning of the term “value”. On the one hand, 
value is a polysemous term, even more so when not complemented by an adjective that clarifies 
its scope ( such as economic, financial, or sentimental). On the other hand, the rest of the 
Regulation doesn’t in any way better delineate this concept. Quite the contrary, recital 2 states that:  
“Representation of value also includes external, non-intrinsic value attributed to a crypto-asset by parties concerned 
or market participants, meaning the value can be subjective and can be attributed only to the interest of someone 
purchasing the crypto-asset”. 
Such a lack of a clear delimitation is problematic in terms of legal certainty. Even more so, in an 
area as money laundering, where noncompliance can lead to – individual and corporate – 
administrative, and criminal liability. If framing crypto-assets as tokens holding a value is a sensible 
choice, the genericity of the term “value” should have been counterbalanced by a rigorous 
demarcation of its scope. The legislator should have, first, clarified what type of value was relevant 
and then connected it to external and clearly identifiable indexes.  
In its current formulation, the definition seems to be in contrast with the principle of legal 
certainty. While this is a principle which clear delimitation is debated and hard to grasp, 123 
foreseeability is certainly one of its key elements.124 As detailed by the Venice Commission of the 
Council of Europe foreseeability means that laws “must be formulated with sufficient precision and clarity 
to enable legal  subjects to regulate their conduct in conformity with it ”.125 The current definition of crypto -
asset does not seem to be precise enough to allow regulated entities to assess ex ante whether they 
fall within the purview of the anti-money laundering legislation.  
For anti-money laundering purposes, it would be advisable to circumscribe the concept of crypto-
asset only to those tokens that have an economic value. The presence of such economic value 
should be connected to external, objective parameters shelving the subjective evaluation 
prescribed by recital 2. These could include: whether the token has a market value and is listed by 
 
123 J. Van Meerbeeck, The principle of legal certainty in the case law of the European court of justice: from certainty to trust, 
in European Law Review, 41, 2016, 280. 
124 This connection has been most recently confirmed, in 2022, by the Court of Justice of the European 
Union, Republic of Poland v European Parliament and Council of the European Union, Case C -157/21, 
“the principle of legal certainty requires, on the one hand, that the rules of law be clear and precise and, on the other, that their 
application be foreseeable for those subject to the law, in particular, where they may have adverse consequences. That prin ciple 
requires, inter alia, that legislation must enable those concerned to know precisely the extent of the obligations imposed on them, 
and those persons must be able to ascertain unequivocally their rights and obligations and take steps accordingly”. 
125 Venice Commission of the Council of Europe, The Rule of Law Checklist, Venice, 2016, 26. 
 126 
major exchangers, whether the token incorporates an underlying asset of economic value, whether 
the asset or the network reaches a threshold turnover.  
The suggested delimitation of the analysed definition is not only required by the principle of legal 
certainty but also by the logic of the sectorial regulation. Eminently, the current anti -money 
laundering legislation is rooted in a risk-based approach.126 Following this approach, not all tokens 
should be regulated based on a general principle of precaution. Rather, compliance duties should 
be imposed only on those token s that pose a significant enough risk. In terms of anti -money 
laundering, a prerequisite to this risk is for the token to have an economic value. Namely, it is such 
value that enables criminals to use it – whether to invest, pay, be paid, or launder. 
It will, thus, be up to the Supervisory Authority, and in particular the European Banking Authority, 
to issue guidelines that clarify what is meant by value so to guarantee the Regulation is compliant 
with European law and with the spirit of the anti-money laundering legislation.  
In sum, the definition of crypto-asset as a “digital representation of value” constitutes a welcomed 
modification of the previous approach as it shifts to a principle -based definition not focused on 
each single implementation of the token. At the same time , the absence of any specification 
regarding what is meant with the term “value” seems in breach of the principle of legal certainty 
and risks to impose relevant burdens on tokens that cause no significant concern. 
The second category a token can fall into is that of “digital representation of a right”. This second 
category is less on point than the first, at least from an anti-money laundering perspective.  
This is one of the areas where the friction created by the use of a definition envisioned for a 
financial regulation in the anti-money laundering field emerges.127 From a financial law perspective, 
 
126 The risk-based approach is one of the founding principles of the anti-money laundering regulation since 
the beginning of the 21 st century. This approach was introduced to promote a proactive approach by 
National regulators and supervisors as well as regulated authorities and avoid the so -called “tick -box 
compliance”. The risk -based approach requires these entities to calculate the r isk of each 
sector/customer/transaction and apply a corresponding level of compliance efforts; as defined by the 
FATF itself in Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk -based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset 
service providers, cit., 31: “The risk based approach to AML/CFT aims to develop prevention and mitigation measures that 
are commensurate with the ML/TF risks that countries and the relevant obliged entities identify ”. For an evaluation of 
such approach see L. Dalla Pellegrina – D. Masciandaro, The risk-based approach in the new European anti-money 
laundering legislation: a law and economics view in Review of law & economics, 2, 2009. For more on the principle and 
its underlying logic see Chapter 4 Section 2.1. 
127 For more on this friction see the following section. 
 127 
the aim of the MiCaR is clear: to encompass the issuance of any tradeable token even if it does not 
have an intrinsic value as it may be connected with the exercise of rights of economic significance 
or in connections to entities of economic significance. From an anti-money laundering perspective, 
monitoring the exchange of digital representations of non-economic rights seems trivial and, again, 
in contrast with the risk -based approach. At the same time, if the right do es have an economic 
value, then it would already fall in the first category of a “digital representation of value” making 
this second category redundant.  
This term should then be interpreted, at least in the anti-money laundering domain, in a sense that 
is coherent with the purpose and logic of the sectorial regulation. Tokens that are a digital 
representation of non-economic rights should, thus, be excluded as non-relevant and the term be 
interpreted as a clarification that also crypto -assets that incorporate economically valuable rights 
should fall under the monitoring duties. This second expression also calls for a clarificatory action 
by the Supervisory Authority to customize the general definition provided by the Regulation to 
the needs of the anti-money laundering legislation.128 
 
2.2.2 The definition of the technology 
 
Having analysed the fundamental elements that make of a token a crypto -asset, it is now time to 
delve into the second pillar of the European definition: the technology. 
The distinctive element of MiCaR, compared with the previous regulations, is that it is technology 
specific. This means that, to qualify as a crypto -asset, a token has to be rooted in a specific 
technology. The technology that has to underpin crypto -assets is, following article 3, Distributed 
Ledger Technology (DLT). In principle, Distributed Ledger Technology is an expression that 
 
128 Such a clarificatory power of the European Supervisory Agencies (ESAs), while not directly provided 
for the crypto asset definition, is dictated by various parts of the MiCaR as art. 2, art. 19, etc. 
 128 
identifies all those technologies that use, to store their data, a distributed repository – the 
distributed ledger – in contrast with a centralized one.129  
The relation between blockchain and DLT is rather vague as the two terms are either used 
alternatively130 or, more frequently, blockchain is framed as a subcategory of DLTs.131 In the latter 
sense, blockchain is seen as a DLT that not only decentralizes data storage but also the governance 
of the network. To further complicate the matter, the term blockchain – accompanied by the 
adjective permissioned – is used to identify techn ologies that only decentralize data storage and 
retain, at least in part, centralized control.  
The expression “Distributed Ledger Technology” does not, therefore, identify a clearly defined 
technology or class thereof. Rather, the interpreter must analyse the content of the definition to 
understand what conception of DLT is adopted by the legislator. The Regulation seems to adopt 
a broad interpretation of the expression Distributed Ledger Technology. One that encompasses 
any technology that presents at least some elements of decentralization.132 
There are three elements that the Regulation identifies as key to a DLT: a decentralized ledger, a 
consensus mechanism, and a set of nodes. The Regulation frames a Distributed Ledger 
Technology as any technology that is rooted in a shared, distributed ledger safeguarded and 
updated by a series of nodes according to a preestablished consensus mechanism.  
If we go back to our previous distinction between centralized and decentralized networks, we can 
see the definition can be interpreted to encompass both. Eminently, MiCaR’s definition does not 
distinguish between technologies that centralize the governance and those that decentralize it: the 
 
129 The European Banking Authority , Report with Advice for the European Commission on Crypto ‐assets, cit., 8, 
defines it as a technology that “ enables the storage, update and validation of information in a decentralised way ”; The 
law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 26, “DLT refers to a group of technologies 
that use different techniques and structures to store, synchronise and maintain a shared ledger of digital records across a network 
of computing centres”. 
130 A. Ferreira – P. Sandner, Eu search for regulatory answers to crypto assets and their place in the financial markets’ 
infrastructure, cit.; C. Kuner – F. Cate – O. Lynskey – C. Millard – N. Ni Loideain – D. Svantesson, Blockchain 
versus data protection, cit., 103; M. Finck, Blockchains and data protection in the European Union, cit., 18. 
131 In this second sense see D. Carlisle, Virtual currencies and financial crime: Challenges and opportunities, cit., 3 
and European Banking Authority , Report with Advice for the European Commission on Crypto ‐assets, cit., 8; H. 
Axelsen – J. Jensen – R. Omri, When is a DAO Decentralized?, cit., 53. 
132 This also emerges from recital 1 of MiCaR that clearly qualifies blockchain as one of the possible 
applications of DLT, see “It is expected that many applications of DLT, including blockchain technology, that have not 
yet been fully studied will go on to create new types of business activity and business models which, together with the crypto-asset 
sector itself, will lead to economic growth and new employment opportunities for Union citizens”. 
 129 
nodes could all be owned or controlled by a single entity and/or the consensus mechanism be 
designed so to fully centralize control of the ledger and still the technology would qualify as a DLT 
under MiCaR.133  
What is relevant for our ends is that, irrespective of the governance mechanism implemented, any 
technology that decentralizes the physical storage of data among a set of nodes and establishes a 
protocol to enable a consensus to be formed among these nodes regarding the state of the ledger 
is qualified as a DLT under MiCaR.  
When it comes to financial flows monitoring, such a choice is highly problematic as it misses the 
key risk factor generated by blockchain: the decentralization of governance. A decentralized ledger 
is no different than a centralized ledger when is controlled by a single (or even by multiple) entities 
that can be clearly identified and regulated.134 
We will return to this point in the following section. 
 
2.2.3 Assessing the Market in Crypto -assets Regulation. Customized, 
just not enough? 
 
The previous section has analysed the definition provided by the Market in Crypto -assets 
Regulation to identify its scope and strategy. The present section will critically examine it in light 
of the specific risks crypto-assets create for financial flows monitoring.  
The Market in Crypto-assets Regulation undoubtedly constitutes a step towards the customization 
of the legislative response to the specificities of blockchain technology and of decentralized tokens. 
The adoption of a crypto-specific regulation and definition, and the generalization of the concept 
 
133 As we have discussed in the section on Permissioned Blockchains (Chapter 2, Section 7) these types of 
consensus protocol have already been envisioned and implemented. Proof of Authority, above described, 
entrusts the power to update the ledger to nodes that hold a permission given by the network administrator 
and/or the underlying protocol.  
134 Examples of such centralized networks in terms of governance are permissioned blockchains that allow 
the creation of centres of governance, for more on permissioned blockchains see Chapter 2 Section 7, for 
an example of such network see the one created by IBM and Maersk described in Chapter 1 Section 4. 
 130 
of crypto-assets not to encompass single implementations but any token that incorporates a value 
are, within the above outlined limits, welcomed innovations. To customize is, however, not 
enough, if the customization does not encompass the key elements that differen tiate one 
conceptual category from the other. The MiCaR fails exactly at doing this by providing a definition 
that does not distinguish the key elements that make a crypto-asset qualitatively different in terms 
of financial monitoring compared with a digital asset. The present section will delve into this failure 
to then identify possible adjustments.   
The MiCaR certainly adopts interesting and welcomed innovations when it comes to framing 
crypto-assets. 
First and foremost, the MiCaR partially abandons the strict adherence to the principle of 
technological neutrality. With the introduction of a crypto -specific definition, the European 
legislator goes beyond the previous approach that completely decoupled p olicy and technology. 
Rather than a complete desertion, the Regulation seems to reframe technological neutrality. 
As clarified by recital 5. 
“a Union framework on markets in crypto-assets should not regulate the underlying technology. Union legislation 
avoids imposing unnecessary and disproportionate regulatory burdens on the use of technology, since the Union and 
the Member States seek to maintain competitiveness on a global market”. 
The recital distinguishes between two targets a regulation can aim at: the technology and its use. 
The former is out of the purview of the Regulation that should instead focus on the latter. 
Technological neutrality is, thus, for the legislator not to medd le with the architecture of the 
technology but only with the actions of the individuals that interact with it. In this sense, the 
legislator can regulate the market created by a specific technology and the use individuals make of 
it (as long as it avoids unnecessary burdens) but not the underlying technological architecture.  
To exemplify this distinction between regulation of the technology and regulation of its use we 
can take as an example the discussion regarding the limitation of the Proof of Work (PoW) 
consensus protocol.135 This protocol is at the centre of a harsh debate due to its environmental 
 
135 For a description of this protocol see Chapter 2 paragraph 4. 
 131 
impact.136 It was precisely because of environmental concerns that, as part of the legislative 
procedure in the Parliament, MEPs proposed a series of amendments to the MiCaR aimed at 
limiting, if not banning, the use of Proof of Work in the European Union. 137 These amendments 
would have constituted precisely what was excluded by recital 5: a direct regulation of the 
underlying technology. By banning or limiting Proof of Work, the regulator would have acted 
directly on the technological architecture and not on its use. This direct regulation of the 
technology was ultimately rejected by the Parliament138 as it was perceived as an intrusion in a field 
that should be within the sole purview of the market: choosing which type of technology (i.e., 
consensus protocol) is more convenient. 
It is clear how this interpretation of the principle of technological neutrality differs from the one 
previously embraced by the Financial Action Task Force and the same European legislator as part 
of the Fifth Anti-money Laundering Directive. There being neutral meant regulating the activity 
regardless of the technology ,139 that was not to be mentioned. With the Market in Crypto -assets 
Regulation, being neutral means regulating the use of a certain technology without directly 
targeting its architecture. In the first sense, the neutrality was directed towards the choice of the 
technology: the legislator did not have to influence players in choosing between different types of 
technologies when performing a certain activity . In the second sense, it is directed towards the 
architecture of the chosen technology : the legislator can regulate a technology but should not 
influence its development. 
This is certainly a welcomed reinterpretation.  
 
136 See L. Wintermeyer, Bitcoin’s Energy Consumption Is A Highly Charged Debate – Who’s Right?, in Forbes, 10th 
May 2021, https://www.forbes.com/sites/lawrencewintermeyer/2021/03/10/bitcoins-energy-
consumption-is-a-highly-charged-debate--whos-right/?sh=756343e87e78; D. Boreiko – G. Ferrarini – P. 
Giudici, Blockchain startups and prospectus regulation, cit., 2019, 668 
137 See European Parliament, Amendments 503 – 838 Markets in Crypto -assets, and amending Directive (EU) 
2019/1937 2020/0265(COD), 3rd of June 2021, 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/ECON-AM-693741_EN.pdf  
138 E. Nicolle – L. Pronina, EU Crypto Proposal Seen as De-Facto Bitcoin Ban Fails in Vote, in Bloomberg, 14th of 
March 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-03-14/eu-crypto-proposal-seen-as-de-
facto-bitcoin-ban-fails-in-vote?leadSource=uverify%20wall; see also, European Parliament, Cryptocurrencies 
in the EU: new rules to boost benefits and curb threats, Press Release, 14 th of March 2022, 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-room/20220309IPR25162/cryptocurrencies-in-the-eu-
new-rules-to-boost-benefits-and-curb-threats.  
139 As clarified by Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset 
service providers, cit., 9, technological neutrality means that the FATF’s requirements “ apply irrespective of the 
technological platform involved”. 
 132 
On the one hand, with paradigm shifting technology – as blockchain140 – a blind equation between 
different architectures is very similar to a discrimination as the same rules are applied to 
technologies which functioning and underlying logic are completely different. At the same time, 
focusing on the specificities of a certain technology enables the legislator to address the specific 
challenges it poses without having to restrict itself to generic rules. 
On the other hand, excluding from the legislative purview the technological architecture seems a 
reasonable choice. To carve in a normative text fixed standards regarding what a technology ought 
to be is a tricky exercise. Miscommunication and misunderstan ding between policymakers and 
market participants can lead to illogical solutions that curb innovation and mummify the market. 
Further, the rapid evolution of new technologies, and of the underlying architecture, does not 
match the pace of policy making wi th the risk of having legislations that are born obsolete. It 
seems, hence, more reasonable for the Regulator to demand the market – including the developers 
– that a technology achieves certain goals or upholds certain standards without directly dictating 
the how.  
Notwithstanding the customization purported by the MiCaR, the focus of this tailoring effort is 
not the governance structure – meaning the decentralization of control – but the data archiving 
structure - meaning the decentralization of the storage of infor mation. This is exemplified by the 
definition of Decentralized Ledger Technology (DLT) adopted by the Regulation. Article 3 MiCaR 
defines DLT as “an information repository that keeps records of transactions and that is shared across, and 
synchronized between, a set of DLT network nodes using a consensus mechanism”.  It is clear how, under this 
definition, there is no distinction between governance structures: all technologies that adopt some 
form of decentralization in their record-keeping strategy are equated.  
Now, mixing centralized and decentralized assets is, at least in terms of anti -money laundering 
legislation, an incorrect equation. As explained above, the crux of the problem, when it comes to 
financial flows monitoring, is not the way data is stored but the way the network is governed. If 
data is stored in a decentralized manner but centrally controlled, then there is no real difference 
with a centralized system: the policymaker can regulate the network’s controller and impose on 
 
140 A similar technology -specific approach to the policing of new technologies has been taken by the 
European Union concerning the regulation of Artificial Intelligence; see Proposal for a Regulation of the 
European Union laying down harmonized rules on Artif icial Intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) and 
amending certain Union legislative acts, 21st of April 2021. 
 133 
them identification and monitoring duties. In contrast, if the network fully decentralizes 
governance, then there is no centralized controller, and anyone can enter and exit the market 
without a filter. This is where financial monitoring becomes qualitativ ely different as it, at least 
partially, lacks its usual point of pressure: intermediaries.  
To clearly understand how governance, and not data storage, is the key element of differentiation 
for anti-money laundering purposes, let us return to our analysis of permissioned ledger.141  
A permissioned blockchain is a type of DLT that partially or completely recentralizes control. This 
means that for the participants to perform certain key actions – e.g., access the market, transact, 
access all or certain parts of the ledger, etc. – they need a permission from the governance body. 
Examples of these networks are the (now defunct) DIEM stable coin and the European 
Blockchain Services Infrastructure (EBSI) created by the European Union.142  
In a network as such, the problem of control is primarily a matter of reach .143 If the National 
Authority can force the governance body to comply, then there is no architectural limit to 
control.144 The governance body can be required to only grant access to those users that are 
identified (following the Know Your Customer procedures) and can then be compelled to monitor 
and report individual transactions.145 The identification limitation, which is a design feature in fully 
 
141 For an analysis of how a permissioned ledger works see Chapter 2, Section 7. 
142 For a description of the European Blockchain Services Infrastructure see https://ec.europa.eu/digital-
building-blocks/wikis/display/EBSI/What+is+ebsi  
143 This is also underlined by Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual Currencies, 
cit., 32, “ Centralised virtual currency systems could be complicit in money laundering and could deliberately seek out 
jurisdictions with weak AML/CFT regimes. Decentralised convertible virtual currencies (…) may seem to exist in a digital 
universe entirely outside the reach of any particular country”. 
144 Banca d’Italia, Comunicazione della Banca d’Italia in materia di tecnologie decentralizzate nella finanza e cripto-attività, 
cit., 7, “ una distinzione rilevante va fatta tra DLT permissioned o permissionless. Le prime richiedono che un utente, per 
accedere e apportare modifiche al registro (ledger), debba ottenere il permesso da parte di un soggetto o entit à centrale, che de 
facto assume  responsabilità di governance. Nelle DLT permissionless invece è difficile o impossibile individuare tale 
responsabile”. 
145 This is clearly stated by the same FATF in Financial Action Task Force, FATF Report to the G20 Finance 
Ministers and Central Bank Governors on So -called Stablecoins, Paris, 2020, 13, “The central developers and governance 
bodies of so -called stablecoins are in a unique position to undertake ML/TF risk mitigation, as they determine how the 
functions of the so -called stablecoin arrangement (e.g. the stabilisation mechanism, transfer of co ins and user interface) will 
operate. They make key design and functionality decisions and they determine the extent to which functions are centralised or  
decentralised and whether AML/CFT preventive measures are built into a so -called stablecoin. They can  also control the 
access points to the arrangement (e.g., who can participate as an exchange or transfer service or whether a person can only access 
the system through a VASP) and impose AML/CFT standards setting out expectations or operating requirements for key 
entities in the arrangement, including exchanges and custodial wallet providers. They are also best positioned to undertake 
centralised AML/CFT functions, such as transaction monitoring across the so-called stablecoin arrangement”. 
 134 
decentralized ledgers, is not present in permissioned ones, completely changing the possible 
legislative strategies. The same goes for the limitation connected with the seizure of assets. If in 
permissionless blockchains seizure is not possible – without the account’s private key – as these 
networks process transactions in a mostly blind and trustless manner, the same does not apply in 
permissioned networks. With a consensus mechanism as Proof of Authority (PoA),146 that affords 
to certain nodes the authority to approve new transactions, there is always the possibility to require 
such nodes not to process certain transactions, this way, de facto, freezing the assets. 
The crux of the anti-money laundering risk is, hence, not how the data is stored or processed but 
how the governance is structured. 
Here the fallacy of applying a definition thought for a financial regulation to a crime control 
legislation emerges again. The risk posed by crypto -assets to the former legislation does not 
completely collide with the latter.  
For financial regulation the main risks are financial stability, market integrity, client/investor 
protection, and market efficiency.147 In this sense, the elements this regulation targets are such as 
the issuer’s solvency, the provision of correct and transparent information to customers and 
investors, etc. In contrast, the money laundering regulation is solely aimed at avoiding the use o f 
the financial infrastructure – whether traditional or crypto – to finance crime and/or launder the 
proceeds of criminal activity. The elements this regulation targets are, thus, the identification of 
the market participants, their correct profiling, the monitoring of transactions, and the freezing 
and reporting of suspicious ones.  
The discrepancy between the objectives pursued is momentous when it comes to crypto -asset. 
The elements of crypto -assets that graduate their risk level for financial regulation do not 
completely coincide with those relevant to anti-money laundering. A common definition will most 
likely end up being inadequate for one or the other.  
The emergence of a global stablecoin is a good example of how these risks differ.  
 
146 For an analysis of the functioning of Proof of Authority see Chapter 2, Section 7. 
147 See D. Zetzsche – F. Annunziata – W. Douglas - R. P. Buckley, The Markets in Crypto -Assets regulation 
(MiCA) and the EU digital finance strategy , cit., 208; A. Ferreira – P. Sandner, Eu search for regulatory answers to 
crypto assets and their place in the financial markets’ infrastructure, cit., 3. 
 135 
For global stablecoin it is meant a crypto -asset, issued by a private entity, that maintains a stable 
value148 and is available on a global scale.149 Such a coin would de facto be in direct competition with 
national fiat currencies. A global stablecoin is deemed to generate relevant risks in terms of financial 
regulation as it imperils financial stability challenging the role of the Central Bank and the 
functioning of the credit system.150 This risk is clearly highlighted by MiCaR that regulates in detail 
such tokens and even provides for a veto power when such coins “serious threat to the smooth operation 
of payment systems, monetary policy transmission or monetary sovereignty”.151  
In contrast, the same type of tokens does not generate a clear risk in terms of anti -money 
laundering. Of course, as underlined by the FATF’s Report on Stablecoins, 152 the potential for 
mass adoption and global reach does constitute a risk as it widens the potential for misuse of the 
system.  
However, as underlined by the same Report: 
“the FATF consider that so-called stablecoins with potential for mass-adoption will be centralised to some extent, 
with an identifiable central developer or governance body. The FATF considers that these developers and 
governance bodies will be, in general, financial institutions (e.g., as a business involved in the ‘issuing and 
managing means of payment’) or a VASP (e.g., as a business involved in the ‘participation in and provision of 
 
148 A. Blandin et al., 3 rd Global Cryptoasset Benchmarking Study , cit., 38; O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, 
“Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 8; The law society, Blockchain: Legal and 
regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 74; E. Martino, Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A 
framework for a functional comparative analysis, cit., 7. 
149 See the definition of European Banking Authority, Report with advice to the Commission on crypto -assets, cit., 
7 ‘Stablecoins’ are a relatively new form of payment/exchange token that is typically asset -backed (by physical collateral or 
crypto-assets) or is in the form of an algorithmic stablecoin (with algorithms being used as a way to stabilise volatility in the 
value of the token)”; E. Martino, Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional 
comparative analysis, cit., 8. 
150 A. Ferreira – P. Sandner, Eu search for regulatory answers to crypto assets and their place in the financial markets’ 
infrastructure, cit., 7, “The biggest risks of global stablecoins are attributed to their scale, which could affect monetary policy, 
monetary sovereignty, financial stability, fair competition, and the in - ternational monetary system overall ”; E. Martino, 
Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional comparative analysis, cit., 9 -10; 
Bank of England, Financial Stability in Focus: Cryptoassets and decentralised finance, cit., 20. 
151 See art. 24 para 2, Regulation on Markets in Crypto assets, see also the similar provisions of art. 21, para 
2, lett. e. 
152 Financial Action Task Force, FATF Report to the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors on So -
called Stablecoins, cit., 8-9. 
 136 
financial services related to an issuer’s offer and/or sale of a virtual asset’) under the revised FATF Standards. 
This is an important control to mitigate the ML/TF risks poses by such so-called stablecoins”.153 
The Report identifies two key risk factors: that a stable coin may be issued by an entity located in 
a non -compliant jurisdiction (the abovementioned problem of reach) or that it could have a 
“decentralized governance structure”.154 The FATF’s analysis hence clarifies that, for money laundering 
purposes, the crux of the risk generated by stablecoins is their governance structure and not their 
potential to collapse the current monetary and financial market.  
The repercussion of the different risk profile on the definitory strategy is clear. The financial 
regulation will devise a definition that encompasses all possible tokens as they all generate a risk 
for financial stability, with share of the market being t he key risk indicator. The anti -money 
laundering one will (or rather should) distinguish between centralized and decentralized assets, 
with the main risk factor being the absence of a governance body that can be regulated. 
To sum up, the main fallacy of the definition of crypto -asset laid out by MiCaR is that, while a 
crypto-specific definition, this is not an anti-money laundering specific definition. This means that 
the definition is not customized to those characteristics of crypto -assets that generate a risk for 
financial flows monitoring. The aim of MiCaR is to provide fo r a definition ample enough to 
encompass any crypto -asset irrespectively of their anti -money laundering risk.155 The purpose of 
an anti -money laundering definition should be to distinguish between assets that create 
qualitatively different risks so to customize the policy strategy to each one of them.  
 
153 Financial Action Task Force, FATF Report to the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors on So -
called Stablecoins, cit., 3, 8; of the same advice O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” 
finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 25. 
154 Financial Action Task Force, FATF Report to the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors on So -
called Stablecoins, cit., 4. 
155 This is clearly underlined by recital 16 of MiCaR that states “ Any legislative act adopted in the field of crypto -
assets should be specific and future-proof, be able to keep pace with innovation and technological developments and be founded 
on an incentive -based approach. The terms ‘crypto -assets’ and ‘distributed led ger technology’ should therefore be defined as 
widely as possible to capture all types of crypto-assets that currently fall outside the scope of Union legislative acts on financial 
services”; A. Ferreira – P. Sandner, Eu search for regulatory answers to crypto assets and their place in the financial 
markets’ infrastructure, cit., 12 – 13, “This definition aims to capture the entire universe of crypto assets, but for those 
expressly excluded from MiCA. This broad application is intended to ensure there are no crypto assets outside of the regulatory 
framework”.  
 
 
 137 
This especially when one category of asset s creates such a different risk to require a qualitatively 
new strategy. Equating centralized and decentralized assets in a single definition has a direct impact 
on the content of the regulation itself. Namely, if all tokens – both centralized and decentralized 
– are treated in the same way, the traditional strategy (thought for centralized assets) is likely to 
prevail. The way the scope is drawn directly influences the ability of the policymaker to customize 
the anti-money laundering duties depending on the  type of assets. This does not mean that each 
asset should be in a micro category and that duties should be minutely customized to each one of 
them. Such a customization would make the regulation overly intricate and compliance  
unnecessarily complicate . However, when a category of asset s presents such specificities, as 
decentralized crypto-assets do, then a distinction should be introduced at the definition level so 
that a specific strategy can be devised.  
In the face of such an inadequate strategy, the European legislator still can adjust its course without 
any direct modification of the MiCaR. As we have highlighted, the original sin in the definition of 
crypto-assets is the discrepancy in the purposes pursued by the financial and anti-money laundering 
regulation. This mismatch can be solved without modifying the overarching definition laid out by 
MiCaR.  
The problem with the analysed definition is that it does not distinguish between different 
categories of crypto -assets, not that certain crypto -assets that should be regulated are not. The 
definition is thus over-generic, not over-specific. To solve this problem, the needed distinctions 
could be introduced directly at the anti -money laundering level. The legislation s composing the 
Anti-money Laundering Package could be modified to include sub -definitions to allow the 
establishment of a customized strategy.  
This legislative technique would be in line with the overarching purpose of MiCaR: creating a 
common European definition of crypto-assets. It would leave untouched a general definition that 
would be generic enough to become the gold standard the E uropean Union is aiming at. At the 
same time, it would allow to create subcategories to customize the generic definition to the needs 
of each specific legislation.  
Furthermore, such a specification is already present in the MiCaR itself. Article 3 of the Regulation 
distinguishes between three subcategories of tokens to which it applies slightly different rules: the 
 138 
e-money tokens, the asset-referenced tokens, and the electronic money tokens.156 In a similar way 
as these three categories adapt the overarching definition of crypto-assets to the specific needs of 
the financial regulation, sub-definitions could be introduced to adapt the same generic definition 
to the specific needs of the anti-money laundering legislation. 
So, what should these categories be? The next section will delve exactly into this.  
 
3. Going back to the roots. A proposal for a money laundering specific  
definition of crypto-asset  
 
Until now we have talked about the ‘is’ of crypto-assets regulation. The present section will focus 
on the ‘ought’. This section will, building upon the previous analysis, propose the fundamental 
elements a definition of crypto -assets should have to be truly customized to the anti-money 
laundering field.  
It is out of question that the key element of innovation introduced by crypto -assets is 
decentralization. This is a conviction shared by both the crypto -specific and the crypto -neutral 
definitions we have analysed so far. However, the Market in Crypto-assets Regulation showed that 
not any type of decentralization necessarily constitutes an element of differentiation from previous 
assets – at least for anti-money laundering purposes.  
The facet of decentralization that underlies the capsizing of the anti -money laundering 
infrastructure is the decentralization of the governance. For decentralization of the governance is 
meant that blockchain networks do not entrust to any single authorit y the management of the 
network. Rather, blockchains are managed by a collection of mutually distrustful nodes that 
operate according to the encoded rules of the network. This makes the functioning of the network 
de facto autonomous as none of the participants can disobey the encoded rules of the network and 
these are automatically enforced through the coral, blind action of the nodes. The decentralization 
of the governance does not entail that blockchain’s code is immutable : minor amendments and 
 
156 For more on these three categories see Section 2.  
 139 
updates are carried out regularly in every blockchain. Rather, that major changes need a near -
unanimous approval and are hence very hard to carry out.157  
The first element that is of crucial relevance for our distinction is the presence of  a centralized 
governance body. As underlined in the discussion concerning permissioned blockchain,158 if such 
a body is present then it can be forced to implement network -wide compliance and traditional 
anti-money laundering regulatory themes would re-emerge. The first characteristic of a 
decentralized token is, hence, that it should be rooted in a network not governed by any centralized 
entity.  
The second element of decentralization that is key to our distinction is disintermediation. A 
disintermediated network is one that  enables users to access it and exchange the token in the 
absence of any intermediary. Even if the network’s governance is decentralized, nothing hinders 
the creation of a decentralized but fully intermediated network. Decentralized networks are far 
from anarchic machines which functioning is left to the wisdom of the crowd. Rather, the 
blockchain replaces the centralized human authority – typical of traditional infrastructures – with 
a set of encoded rules that dictate how the network functions and that, lacking a governance centre, 
are very difficult to modify – hence the blockchain motto “in code we trust”.159 If such rules were 
to envision a fully intermediated network, there would be no significant difference with traditional 
networks and, again, the intermediary -centred strategy would apply. This does not mean that the 
network has to be fully disintermediated; intermediaries can exist, the key element is that their use 
should not be compulsory but merely an option. The second key characteristic of a decentralized 
token should, thus, be that it allows users to access the network and exchange value in a 
disintermediated fashion: peer-to-peer.  
 
157 This is clearly depicted both by the Ethereum split after the DAO hack (described in the previous 
Chapter) and by the debate regarding how to enhance the efficiency of Bitcoin that has been dragging for 
the last decade without achieving any significant re sult precisely due to the choral nature of any major 
amendment, see P. Ennis, An Anatomy of Bitcoin's Great Scaling Debate, in Coindesk, 15th May 2016, 
https://www.coindesk.com/markets/2016/05/15/an-anatomy-of-bitcoins-great-scaling-debate/. This 
does not mean that decentralized networks have no governance structure rather that such governance 
mechanisms are informal, for an analysis see  R. Thapa – P. Sharma – J. Hüllmann – B. Savarimuthu , 
Identifying Influence Mechanisms in Permissionless Blockchain Communities: The Bitcoin Case  in 42nd International 
Conference on Information Systems (ICIS), 2021. 
158 See chapter 2, section 7. 
159 G. Maia – J. Vieira dos Santos, MiCA and DeFi ('Proposal for a Regulation on Market in Crypto -Assets' 
and'Decentralised Finance'), cit., 16. 
 140 
In line with the approach taken by MiCaR, which introduces one general definition (crypto-assets) 
and three sub -definitions (e -money tokens; asset -referenced tokens, and utility tokens) our 
proposed definitions could be introduced as sub-definitions at the anti-money laundering level.  
The Anti-money Laundering Package could distinguish between two types of tokens: decentralized 
and centralized tokens. In line with MiCaR’s approach , there would be common rules applied 
horizontally to all crypto -assets and then a set of specialized rules to be applied to each category 
of tokens. 
The two tokens could be labelled “decentralized tokens” and “centralized tokens”160 and could be 
defined in the following way: 
“Decentralized token” means a type of crypto-asset that is not governed by any centralized entity and that allows 
users to access the network and exchange value in a peer-to-peer fashion”. 
“Centralized token” means a type of crypto-asset that is governed by a centralized entity that manages the access 
and/or exchange of value in the network”. 
These two definitions would enable the creation of a new regulatory strand customized to the 
characteristics of decentralized crypto -assets. One that allows to address the peculiarities of the 
decentralized governance model these assets introduce and to ad apt the previous intermediary-
centred strategy to disintermediated environments.  
We will further delve into how these duties can and should be customized to decentralized 
networks in the following chapters. 
 
 
160 This bipartition is also adopted by C. Leuprecht - C. Jenkins – R. Hamilton, Virtual money laundering: policy 
implications of the proliferation in the illicit use of cryptocurrency, cit., 4, that respectively defines Centralized 
cryptocurrency as those that rely “ on a third -party administrator to issue the currency, maintain its blockchain and 
decide the rules for its use” and Decentralized cryptocurrencies as those that “use open source and math-based peer-
to-peer blockchains that function without a central administrator”. In terms of content such a definition is similar to 
the one above proposed as it similarly distinguishes the two categories based on the governance structure; 
however, given the AML focus of our definition we have added together with the governance the t wo 
elements of access and value exchange management as these two elements are key in establishing the 
concrete ability of the network administrator to control value exchanges in the network. Also, in terms of 
structure we have used a similar phrasing as th at employed by MiCaR to guarantee consistency with the 
other sub-definitions.  
 141 
4. Outside of the Regulatory corral. The strange case of unique and non-
fungible tokens (NFTS) 
 
Having completed our analysis, there is one topic we still need to analyse as part of our excursus 
on the definition of crypto -assets: the exclusion of unique and non -fungible tokens from the 
regulatory perimeter of both the MiCaR and the anti-money laundering regulation.  
Non-fungible tokens are one of the latest implementations of blockchain. They exploit 
blockchains’ immutability and decentralization to create unique, unalterable, and programmable 
tokens that can be freely traded among the participants of the network. 161 On the one hand, 
blockchain’s publicity and immutability safeguards the authenticity and uniqueness of the token 
while allowing anyone to verify it by, simply, accessing the ledger. On the other hand, blockchain’s 
decentralization means that there is no s ingle entity that can unilaterally modify or control the 
status of the token once it is created. The token can both be a digital representation of a physical 
or digital asset – as a work of art, a song, or a ticket to a concert – or solely exist as a digital token.162 
In this latter case, the value is determined exclusively by the characteristics intrinsic to the token, 
its rarity being an important factor.163   
The exclusion of Non -Fungible Tokens from the anti -money laundering regulatory perimeter is 
particularly momentous for three main reasons. 
 
161 For a definition of NFT see EU Blockchain Observatory and Forum, Demystifying Non-fungible Tokens 
(NFTs), 2021, 4, “An NFT is a special type of digital asset or token that can be proved to be unique and not interchangeable 
with another digital asset token (i.e., fungible). This is why it is referred to as a “non -fungible token. Typically, the record of 
the uniqueness of the NFT exists as a cryptographic record on a blockchain, or distributed ledger, and can readily be viewed 
by anyone. While that is not always the case, NFTs are not just digitised information about an asset – they are a digital 
asset”; Chainalysis, The 2022 Cryptocrime Report, cit., 30; for another definition see US Congressional Research 
Service, Non-fungible Tokens (NFTs), Washington, 2022, 1, which provides the following definition of NFTs 
“as unique and non-interchangeable units of data that can signify ownership of associated digital items, such as images, music, 
or videos”. 
162 A. Lennart, The non-fungible token (NFT) market and its relationship with Bitcoin and Ethereum , in FinTech, 1.3, 
2022, 216; US Congressional Research Service, Non-fungible Tokens (NFTs) , cit., 2; M. Nadini – L. 
Alessandretti – F. Di Giacinto – M. Martino – L. Aiello – A. Baronchelli, Mapping the NFT revolution: market 
trends, trade networks, and visual features, in Scientific reports, 11,1, 2021, 6. 
163 For how NFTs can gain value see EU Blockchain Observatory and Forum, Demystifying Non-fungible 
Tokens (NFTs), cit., 4 
 142 
First, unlike the other exceptions provided by MiCaR, NFTs are the only category of assets not 
excluded because they are already regulated under other European legislations – as crypto-assets 
that qualify as insurances, or pension products 164. This is a qualitative difference and is clearly 
underlined by the fact that the exclusion of “crypto-assets that are unique and not fungible with other crypto-
assets” is dictated by a different paragraph, article 2, paragraph 3, than all the other exclusions, that 
fall under article 2, paragraph 4.  
Second, all the anti -money laundering legislations currently under discussion, including the most 
recent Travel Rule Regulation165, in their definition of crypto-assets only refer to the exclusion of 
paragraph three and not to those of paragraph four. This means that only NFTs will be excluded 
from the anti -money laundering regulatory perimeter, making this exception particularly 
momentous. 
Third, NFTs present a high risk of money -laundering. Eminently, these tokens add to the 
pseudonymity, globality, and immateriality typical of crypto -assets, the absence of a clear market 
value typical of artworks and collectibles.166 NFTs representing nothing more than an emoticon or 
a quite simple image have been sold for hundreds of thousands of euros due to their artificial rarity. 
The same goes for the emerging Metaverses’ assets that are frequently incorporated through NFTs. 
How can you calculate the value of a digital piece of land, in a nascent digital world? With a market 
estimated between seventeen and forty-four billion dollars in annual sales,167 NFTs risk to become 
(and have already partially become)168 the next haven for criminal transactions.  
Notwithstanding these characteristics, NFTs have been mostly considered as excluded from the 
purview of anti-money laundering compliance duties. 
 
164 For an analysis of MiCaR’s exclusions see G. Maia – J. Vieira dos Santos, MiCA and DeFi ('Proposal for a 
Regulation on Market in Crypto-Assets' and'Decentralised Finance'), cit., 2. 
165 For an analysis of this Regulation see chapter 4 section 5. 
166 K. Busch, Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs), Congressional Research Service, 2022, 18, “NFTs may be particularly 
susceptible to money laundering since they are easily sent across geographic borders without incurring the financial or regulatory 
costs of physical shipping. Additionally, the price of digital art is highly variable, which enables  money launderers to set the 
desired value with little historical context in which to compare prices”; V. von Wachter - J. R., Regner – O. Ross, NFT 
wash trading: Quantifying suspicious behaviour in NFT markets, in Financial Cryptography and Data Security. FC 2022 
International Workshops, 2022, 2. 
167 K. Busch, Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs), Congressional Research Service, cit., 3. 
168 Chainalysis, The 2022 Crypto Crime report, cit., 29 e ss; Europol, Policing in the Metaverse. What law enforcement 
needs to know, 2022, 19; Financial Action Task Force, Targeted update on implementation of the FATF standards on 
virtual assets and virtual asset, Parigi, 2022, 20. 
 143 
The Financial Action Task Force has been the first to rule on the topic. In its latest Guidance of 
October 2021, the FATF, while not modifying the definition of “virtual asset” introduced in 2018, 
provided a series of clarifications regarding its reach.  
In particular, the Guidance states that: 
“Digital assets that are unique, rather than interchangeable, and that are in practice used as collectibles rather 
than as payment or investment instruments, can be referred to as a non-fungible tokens (NFT) or crypto-
collectibles. Such assets, depending on their characteristics, are generally not considered to be VAs under the 
FATF definition”.169 
The Guidance provides for two clarifications to this exclusion. First, following the substantial 
approach of the FATF legislation, the Guidance directs national authorities to look at the concrete 
function of the NFT rather than its tag. Thus, to be exclud ed are only those tokens that are in 
concreto unique and not fungible. Second, the fact that NFTs are not regulated as virtual assets does 
not exclude that they could fall under another category of regulated instruments.  
The exclusion has been most recently confirmed by the FATF in its Targeted Update of June 
2022.170 However, the same Guidance has included NFTs among the most relevant market trends 
for money laundering purposes.171  
Notwithstanding the above-outlined differences between the FATF’s and the European approach, 
the MiCaR takes an identical stance with regard to NFTs as the FATF’s Guideline. Article 2, 
paragraph 3, of the MiCaR excludes crypto-assets that are unique and not fungible for its purview.  
The Regulation, like the FATF’s Guidance, takes a very narrow approach to this exclusion, one 
aimed at only excluding those crypto-assets that are in concreto unique and not fungible.  
As clarified, by recital 10: 
 
169 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 24. 
170 Financial Action Task Force, Targeted update on implementation of the FATF standards on Virtual Assets and 
Virtual Asset Service Providers, cit., 20. 
171 See also European Banking Authority, Opinion of the European Banking Authority on money laundering and 
terrorist financing risks affecting the EU’s financial sector , cit., 99 which lists non -fungible tokens among the 
emerging risks in the crypto-assets sector.  
 144 
“The fractional parts of a unique and non-fungible crypto-asset should not be considered unique and not fungible. 
The issuance of crypto-assets as non-fungible tokens in a large series or collection should be considered as an 
indicator of their fungibility. The sole attribution of a unique identifier to a crypto-asset is not sufficient to classify 
it as a unique or not fungible. The assets or rights represented should also be unique and not fungible for the 
crypto-asset to be considered unique and not fungible. The exclusion of crypto-assets that are unique and not 
fungible from this Regulation is without prejudice to qualification of such crypto-assets as financial instruments”. 
“This Regulation should also apply to crypto-assets that appear unique and not fungible, but whose de facto 
features or features linked to de facto uses would make them either fungible or not unique. In this regard, when 
assessing and classifying crypto-assets, competent authorities should adopt a substance over form approach, under 
which the features of the asset in question should determine the qualification, not its designation by the issuer”. 
To underline the politically sensitive nature of this topic, this exclusion was the result of the 
negotiation as part of the legislative process. Indeed, the first draft of the MiCa Regulation, as 
proposed by the European Commission in 2020, did not include art icle 2, par agraph 3. The 
proposal only comprised a limited exclusion of unique and non -fungible tokens from certain 
specific duties provided for IPOs. In the previous version , NFTs were hence included in the 
definition of crypto-assets. It is only in the political agreement that they were excluded from the 
scope of the Regulation.  
At the same time, it is the same MiCaR to demand, at article 142, paragraph 2, letter d), to the 
Commission to present, eighteen months after the entry into force of the Regulation. 
“an assessment of the development of markets in unique and not fungible crypto-assets and of the adequacy of 
regulatory treatment of such crypto-assets, including an assessment of the necessity and feasibility of regulating 
offerors of unique and not fungible crypto-assets as well as providers of services related to such crypto-assets”. 
The policy evolution, when it comes to Non -fungible Tokens, is, therefore, far from being over. 
Rather, the MiCaR seems to provide for a momentaneous exclusion to be reassessed in the near 
future. 
 
 
 145 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 146 
Part two 
 
The regulated entities 
How to find intermediaries in a disintermediated world  
 
 
The previous part has analysed the object of the regulation, it is time to turn our attention toward 
its subjects – i.e., the covered entities. As examined in the previous chapter, the anti -money 
laundering regulation of crypto -assets has, so  far, followed a strategy in line with the traditional 
approach. This means the regulation of intermediaries still constitutes the crux of the policy effort. 
These are required to identify and profile their customers and monitor their activity acting, in a 
sense, as proxies of Law Enforcement Authorities. Regulated entities in the crypto-world are under 
the same – except for very few exceptions – duties as traditional intermediaries. 172 The 
identification of the regulated entities is, hence, a fundamental element in the analysis of the policy 
strategy as it constitutes one of the key elements of differentiation compared to the pre -existing 
anti-money laundering regulation which, for the rest, fundamentally coincides with the traditional 
one.  
The identification and definition of regulated entities in the crypto-world has experienced a marked 
evolution during the last decade. If the FATF Guidance of 2014 only identified one regulated 
entity, the MiCAR now lists ten categories of Crypto -assets se rvice providers (CASPs). The 
definition of covered entity (VASP in the FATF lingo or CASP in the European one) has, hence, 
seen a progressive expansion.  
 
172 For a detailed analysis of the anti -money laundering duties applicable to crypto -assets, see the next 
chapter. 
 147 
The expansion is due, on the one hand, to the growth and diversification of the crypto-market. As 
new implementations were introduced, and crypto -assets increasingly shifted from currenc y-like 
tokens to general-purpose digital assets, the number and type of players involved grew. On the 
other hand, during the last decade , the strategy of the policymaker has experienced a marked 
evolution. If, initially, the aim was mainly to fence the crypto-market – to limit any spill over effect 
in the traditional market – as time passed, the Regulator has become increasingly interested in the 
regulation of the crypto-assets market per se.  
 
1. The first phase. Fencing the market 
 
The crypto-assets regulatory strategy, with regards to  the choice of the covered entities, can be 
divided into two fundamental phases.173 During the first phase, the policymaker’s main aim was 
fencing the crypto market through the regulation of its entry and exit points. Key examples of this 
approach being the 2015 FATF Guidance and, although only partially, the Fifth Anti -money 
Laundering Directive. During the second phase, the policymaker entered the market through the 
regulation of a growing number of intra -market operators. Key examples of this approach being 
the FATF Guidance of 2019 and 2021 as well as the Market in Crypto-assets Regulation.  
Besides from these two, clear cut, phases, there is a third phase that can be glimpsed at the horizon. 
In this third phase, the policymaker seems to be pushing for an increasingly architectural 
regulation. Architectural regulation means a type of legislative action that regulates directly the 
technological infrastructure and not the actions of those who interact with it. This approach uses 
regulation as a means to shape the technological infrastructure in a form that facilitates the 
pursuance of policy goals. Examples of this trend are the imposition of the Travel Rule to self-
 
173 This two-step approach is clearly outlined by the EBA that in 2014 (European Banking Authority, 
Opinion on “Virtual Currencies”,  cit., 44) advises for an immediate regulatory response followed by a long -
term approach. The immediate regulatory response consists in addressing “those risks can be mitigated that arise 
in the interaction between VC schemes and the regulated financial services sector (but not those that arise from activities within 
or between VC schemes). This would include risks of money laundering and financial crime”. 
 148 
hosted wallets and the (for now only hinted)  qualification of Decentralized Autonomous 
Organization’s (DAOs) developers as VASPs in the 2021 FATF Guidance and MiCaR’s proposal.  
The present section will delve into the first phase. The following section will analyse the second 
phase with a special focus on the MiCAR and its connection with the upcoming Anti -money 
Laundering Package. The third phase will be analysed in the following two chapters.  
 
1.1 The 2015 Financial Action Task Force Guidance 
 
As we have detailed in the previous chapter, the first regulatory response to crypto -assets was 
essentially reactive. When the dark market Silk Road hit the global headlines in 2013, there was an 
urge for a strong and swift political response.174 Shortly after, such a response was provided by the 
global policymaker in the field: the Financial Action Task Force. In 2014, the FATF published its 
Report on virtual currencies and, in 2015, its first Guidance. In this first policy strand, the FATF 
had overtly one purpose in m ind: fence the crypto -market and avoid, or at least limit , spill over 
effects.  
This was clarified by the same Guidance:175 
“The focus of this Guidance is on the points of intersection that provide gateways to the regulated financial system 
(…) The risk assessment also suggests that AML/CFT controls should target convertible VC nodes—i.e., 
points of intersection that provide gateways to the regulated financial system—and not seek to regulate users who 
obtain VC to purchase goods or services”. 
Eminently, the key risk identified for crypto -assets was that these assets could pollute the 
traditional financial market introducing ill -sourced funds.176 The main idea was, then, to enclose 
 
174 A. Blandin et al., 3rd Global Cryptoasset Benchmarking Study, cit., 49. 
175 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual Currencies, cit., 6. 
176 European Banking Authority, Opinion on “Virtual Currencies”, cit., 44, “The immediate response specified above 
would ‘shield’ regulated financial services from VC schemes. As a result, the response would mitigate the risks arising from 
the interaction between VC schemes and regulated financial services”. 
 149 
the market and police all its entry and exit points, 177 as intra-market transactions were deemed to 
generate a very limited risk. In line with this approach, the Financial Action Task Force solely 
focused on one category of covered entities: Virtual Currencies Exchangers.  
These were defined as:  
“a person or entity engaged as a business in the exchange of virtual currency for real currency, funds, or other forms 
of virtual currency and also precious metals, and vice versa, for a fee (commission). Exchangers generally accept a 
wide range of payments, including cash, wires, credit cards, and other virtual currencies, and can be administrator-
affiliated, non-affiliated, or a third-party provider. Exchangers can act as a bourse or as an exchange desk. 
Individuals typically use exchangers to deposit and withdraw money from virtual currency accounts”. 
The FATF’s definition identified three key characteristics for an entity to qualify as an exchanger. 
First, the provision of the service professionally – as a business – irrespectively if in individual or 
corporate form. Second, the activity had to consist in the exchange of crypto -assets for another 
valuable asset. Third, the entity had to charge a fee for its activity.  
In line with the abovementioned fencing approach, not all exchange activities were deemed 
relevant. Eminently, the Guidance restricted its purview only to those exchangers that engaged in 
crypto-to-fiat transactions, this way leaving crypto -to-crypto exchanges outside the regulatory 
radar.178  
Besides the regulation of exchangers, the Guidance also left the door open for the inclusion of 
other types of entities that may have acted as points of intersection with the traditional market. In 
line with the fencing strategy, the Financial Action Task Force advised States to include “ any other 
types of institution that act as nodes where convertible VC activities intersect with the regulated fiat currency financial 
system”.  
 
177 See also European Banking Authority, Opinion on “Virtual Currencies”, cit., 6, “The EBA also recommends 
that EU legislators consider declaring market participants at the direct interface between conventional and virtual currencie s, 
such as virtual currency exchanges, to become ‘obliged entities’ under the EU Anti Money Laundering Dire ctive and thus 
subject to its anti-money laundering and counter terrorist financing requirements”. 
178 See Financial Action Task Force , Guidance for a risk -based approach Virtual Currencies, cit., 7, “Providers of 
VCPPS conducting activities which fall within the FATF definition of a financial institution are subject to the applicable 
FATF Recommendations. This includes convertible virtual currency exchangers where convertible VC activities intersect with 
the regulated fiat currency financial system” and 9. 
 150 
 
1.2 The Fifth Anti-Money Laundering Directive 
 
The 2015 FATF Guidance was transposed by the European Union in 2018 with the introduction 
of the Fifth Anti -Money Laundering Directive. The Directive constitutes the first European 
legislation in the field of crypto -assets witnessing the relevance of financial flows control in th is 
field. Notwithstanding three years had passed since the FATF’s Guidance, and a new Guidance 
was in the pipeline, the Directive stuck quite strictly, even though not completely, to the FATF’s 
initial approach.  
The Directive - at article 1, paragraph 1, letter c) – introduced two categories of regulated entities: 
providers engaged in exchange services between virtual currencies and fiat currencies and 
custodian wallet providers.  
The first category perfectly collides with the one recommended by the FATF. The Union, in line 
with the Guidance, stuck to the fencing approach and restricted the purview of the Directive only 
to crypto-to-fiat transactions, hence excluding all intra -market transactions (crypto -to-crypto).179 
In contrast, the second category constituted an original addition of the European legislator. Wallet 
providers were not mentioned by the Guidance and could not even be framed within the residual 
category of “institutions that act as nodes with the traditional market” as these offer an exclusively intra-
market service – i.e., the custody of crypto -assets. The inclusion of wallet providers is, hence, a 
novelty introduced by the Union and one that hints at the upcoming legislative strategy that 
introduced an increasing regulation of intra-market players. 
Here a brief digression is needed to understand what wallet providers are and their role in the 
crypto-market.  
 
179 In contrast, the FinCEN Guidance of 2019 extends the purview of the Bank Secrecy Act to any 
exchanger irrespective of whether it pursues crypto -to-crypto or crypto -to-fiat exchanges, see FinCEN, 
Application of FinCEN’s Regulations to Certain Business Models Involving Convertible Virtual Currencies , 9th of May 
2019, 13; this approach was criticized by the EBA in European Banking Authority, EBA Report on the future 
of AML/CFT Framework in the EU, cit., 36 that advised for an extension of the regulatory perimeter to also 
include crypto-to-crypto. 
 151 
As detailed in chapter two, to hold and exchange crypto -assets there is no architectural need to 
use a third party or an intermediary. The user can autonomously generate a private and a public 
key and enter the market. However, the absence of a third party is a double-edged sword. On the 
one hand, it means there is no entity the user has to trust. Its crypto-assets are solely controlled by 
them. No bank failure, financial crisis, or fraud can deprive them of what they own (although the 
market value of the token owned can be affected by external events  and price fluctuations). The 
flip side of full autonomy is full responsibility. The user has no resort if their crypto-assets are lost 
due to negligence or fraud. If the user loses or forgets their private key, there is nothing they can 
do to recover their crypto -assets.180 It would be as if, by losing the password to a bank account, 
the owner  would lose all the money they had therein deposited. The same goes in case of a 
cyberattack, if someone else gains access to a user’s private key and sends money to its account (as 
it would happen with a cloned credit or debit card), no entity can offer a resort.  
This characteristic of crypto -assets, paired with their growing value, caused the emergence of 
multiple entities that offered services to safely store the private key, in a certain way mimicking the 
activity of traditional banks: wallet providers. The type of services offered by wallet providers differ 
widely depending on the business model of the single provider.  
The fundamental bipartition, in terms of business model, is between custodian and non-custodian 
wallet providers.181  
A custodian wallet provider retains control over the funds of their customers.182 There are two 
main business models a custodian can follow. First, the provider simply stores the private key of 
the customer. Instead of having a non-replaceable private key, the user has a (modifiable and, most 
importantly, recoverable) password that can be used to transact. If the password is lost, or for any 
 
180 European Banking Authority, Report on Crypto-assets, cit., 8. Since crypto-assets, and particularly Bitcoin, 
have gained an increasing value there have been multiple reports of people losing their private key and, 
hence, access to millions of euros. See R. Browne, Man makes last-ditch effort to recover $280 million in bitcoin he 
accidentally threw out, in CNBC, 15 January 2021, https://www.cnbc.com/2021/01/15/uk-man-makes-last-
ditch-effort-to-recover-lost-bitcoin-hard-drive.html; N. Popper, Lost Passwords Lock Millionaires Out of Their 
Bitcoin Fortunes, in The New York Times , 12 January 2021, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/12/technology/bitcoin-passwords-wallets-fortunes.html.  
181 FinCEN, Application of FinCEN’s Regulations to Certain Business Models Involving Convertible Virtual Currencies, 
cit., 15, distinguishes among hosted and unhosted wallets; for an overview of wallet providers’ business 
models see G. Hileman – M. Rauchs, Global cryptocurrency benchmarking study , Cambridge Centre for 
Alternative Finance, cit., 47- 65. 
182 European Banking Authority, Opinion on “Virtual Currencies”,  cit., 15; O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, 
“Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 14. 
 152 
other reason compromised, the user can always ask the wallet provider to replace it. Second, the 
provider can store the crypto -assets in their personal accounts, together with those of other 
customers. The entity has direct control of the funds and manages them according to the orders 
received by customers. The flip side of the coin of custodian wallet providers is that they 
reintroduce precisel y those risks of intermediated markets that crypto -assets were created to 
bypass. Custodian wallet providers, as a ny bank in the classic market, can be hacked – as in the 
Mt. Gox case183 – or can defraud their customers – as in the FTX case.184 
To avoid th e reintroduction of the trust dilemma, a token holder can choose a non -custodian 
wallet provider. These entities simply offer a means to safely store the private key. 185 Non 
custodians can provide cold wallets or hot wallets.186 A cold wallet is one where the private key is 
stored offline. A hot wallet is one where the private key is stored online. 187 Non-custodian wallet 
providers only partially solve the issues connected with the use of crypto -assets. These provide a 
secure means to store the key and for a seed that replaces the private key and is easier to remember. 
However, they do not protect agai nst loss as there is no third party to whom the private key is 
entrusted.  
To simplify, we can assimilate custodian wallet providers to a bank and non -custodians to a 
provider of strongboxes.  
The Fifth Directive encompasses among the regulated entities, only the first of the above-outlined 
categories: custodian wallet providers. These are defined – by article 1, paragraph 2, letter d-19) - 
as: 
 
183 Mt Gox was a Japanese exchanger and wallet provider, the largest in the market, that was the object of 
a cyberattack which resulted in the loss of nearly half a billion dollar worth of Bitcoin, for more info see J. 
Wagstaff, Mt. Gox bitcoin debacle: huge heist or sloppy glitch?, in Reuters, 28 February 2014, 
https://www.reuters.com/article/bitcoin-mtgox-heist-idUSL3N0LX2SP20140228  
184 FTX was one of the largest crypto exchangers that also acted as a wallet provider that filed for 
Bankruptcy in 2022 leaving hundreds of account holders stranded, for more information on the causes see 
K. Huang, Why Did FTX Collapse? Here’s What to Know, in The New York Times, 10 November 2022, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/11/10/technology/ftx-binance-crypto-explained.html. see also O. 
Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?,  cit., 39. The 
mentioned cases are just two of the most popularized one but there are numerous other instances of failed 
exchangers in the last decades. 
185 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 14. 
186 European Banking Authority, Report with advice to the Commission on crypto-assets, cit., 9. 
187 European Banking Authority, Report on Crypto-assets, cit., 8; O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” 
or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 7. 
 153 
“an entity that provides services to safeguard private cryptographic keys on behalf of its customers, to hold, store 
and transfer virtual currencies”. 
The text of the disposition opens two interpretative avenues in terms of custodian wallet providers. 
Eminently, a literal reading of the Directive would restrict its purview solely to those providers 
that safeguard the cryptographic key  of their customer (the first business model above detailed) . 
This means that a literal reading of the law would exclude all those businesses that, while de facto 
custodian, manage their clients’ funds directly and not by storing the private key. However, a more 
inclusive, teleological reading of the disposition may point towards the inclusion of any type of 
custodian wallet provider. Eminently, even though custodian wallet providers that hold crypto -
assets in their accounts do not store their cust omers’ private key, they still safeguard the crypto -
assets to enable them “to hold, store and transfer virtual currencies”.  
This second interpretation seems to better reflect the purpose of the Directive: to regulate any 
CASP that retains control of their customers funds. Whether such control is exercised storing the 
private key or the crypto -assets is in concreto irrelevant. Most importantly, is irrelevant in terms of 
anti-money laundering risk: the relevant factor here is whether the intermediary controls the funds 
and can, hence, monitor the customer activity, not how it retains such control. This interpretation 
is also confirmed by the FATF’s Guidance of 2019188 which explicitly includes other types of wallet 
providers’ business models stating that “ VA wallet providers, such as those that host wallets or maintain 
custody or control over another natural or legal person’s VAs, wallet and/or private key(s)”. 
Certainly, this interpretative dilemma underlines how the legislator should be careful regarding the 
level of specificity it wants to adopt when phrasing a technology -related disposition. Eminently, 
by being over-specific regarding the technological means to use there is always the  risk to create 
an unintended lacuna. 
 
1.3 The thorns in the side of the first regulatory strategy. Short - and 
long-term trends 
 
188 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 14. 
 154 
 
With this first wave of regulations, the policymaker dips a toe in the crypto -water. The 2015 
Guidance and the Fifth Directive provide a first response to the emerging issue, educate public 
stakeholders while inciting academic research, and send a message to the market that crypto-assets 
are not exempted from State’s sovereignty. This first effort can, hence, be seen as a positive and 
needed development.  
At the same time, certain criticalities emerge from this first approach. Such criticalities are both 
short-term issues but also highlight long -term problems that still characterize the sectorial 
regulation.  
The fundamental and overarching criticality of the policymaker’s approach can be condensed in 
two loci that characterize blockchain’s architecture: disintermediation and decentralization.  
First, is disintermediation. Particularly, it seems dubious whether focusing solely on intermediaries 
to regulate a technology and a market that makes of disintermediation its raison d’être is an effective 
choice.189 If the intermediary -centred approach was fit for a fully intermediated environment it 
seems, at least partially, inefficient in a disintermediated one.190 
The fallacy of the approach is acknowledged by the same policymaker. Recital 9 of the Directive 
clearly states: 
“the inclusion of providers engaged in exchange services between virtual currencies and fiat currencies and custodian 
wallet providers will not entirely address the issue of anonymity attached to virtual currency transactions, as a large 
 
189 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 18, “P2P transactions are not explicitly subject to AML/CFT controls under the FATF Standards. 
This is because the Standards generally place obligations on intermediaries, rather than on individuals themselves ”; B. 
Mesquita – S. Maranhao – J. Seigneur, Enabling KYC and AML verification in DeFi service, cit., 2. 
190 As underlined by O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory 
response?, cit., 27, “The first pitfall lies in trying to replicate the existing regulatory framework only and exhaustively, without 
taking into account the specific characteristics (and therefore the potential benefits) of DeFi. This tempting approach leads  to 
restricting the focus of analysis to the identification of intermediaries to whom requirements should be applied –and there are 
in fact intermediaries in DeFi, although not necessarily at all levels”; World Economic Forum, Pathways to the Regulation 
of Crypto-Assets: A Global Approach, cit., 7; World Economic Forum, Decentralized Finance (DeFi) Policymaker 
Toolkit, cit., 18. 
 155 
part of the virtual currency environment will remain anonymous because users can also transact without such 
providers”.191 
At the same time, the approach is understandable, at least as a first reaction. Faced with a 
completely new technology , with a clear criminogenic potential, it is only normal that the first 
reaction is to resort to the previous strategy. What is certainly more questionable is maintaining 
the same approach going forward. Furthermore, while the crypto-assets’ market was conceived as 
a decentralized and disintermediated way for individuals to transact, as detailed in chapter one, 
intermediaries have been gaining an increasingly central role. In this sense, extending the anti -
money laundering regulation to these entities seems like a sensible choice. Namely, while it is true 
that peer-to-peer transactions remain a possibility, using intermediaries makes, especially exchange 
activities, much easier. It is, hence, important to police these players to guarantee they do not 
become large-scale crime facilitators.  
Second, is decentralization. The extension of an intermediary-centred approach to a decentralized 
market makes it difficult to fit a decentralized organization into the classic concept of the firm. As 
analysed in chapter two, blockchain’s decentralization enables the establishment of “headless” , 
horizontal organizations that permit innovative forms of collaboration. Such autonomous 
organizations challenge the classic categories of management, investors, etc. A prime example of 
this trend is Decentralized Fi nance (DeFi) 192. DeFi aims at substituting the highly centralized 
traditional financial institutions with decentralized, autonomous organizations rooted in smart 
contracts and based on peer -to-peer networks.193 Dealing with such headless organizations, the 
legislator has been struggling to draw the line between regulated and unregulated and, most 
importantly, to ascertain on who should compliance duties, and related liabilities, fall.  
Namely, if, from a macro-perspective, the system relies on intermediaries to control financial flows, 
from a micro perspective, it relies on the management (a form of intra -business intermediary) to 
guarantee the controls are applied by each firm. 194 Decentralized infrastructures have led the 
 
191 On a similar note, US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 
34 “ the present reliance on centralized VASPs to comply with AML/CFT and sanctions obligations is not likely to 
sufficiently mitigate illicit finance risks associated with DeFi services”. 
192 On the role of DeFi in facilitating and enabling criminal activity see Chainalysis, The 2022 Cryptocrime 
Report, cit., 5. 
193 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 7. 
194 E. Martino, Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional comparative 
analysis, cit., 3, “Regulating intermediaries is, indeed, the most common and simple approach to regulate financial activities.4 
 156 
regulator to take a “where’s wally” approach which rely on the supposition that somewhere in the 
DeFi infrastructure there is probably (recognizing that it will not always be the case) an identifiable 
person, whether legal or natural, providing a service that would render them subject to compliance 
with Anti-money Laundering requirements.  
This dilemma is a cross-cutting theme of blockchain regulation and one we will encounter further 
on in our analysis.195 Suffice it to say for now, that, at this first stage of blockchain regulation, this 
was still a limited problem. Ethereum – and with it general use programmable contracts – was 
introduced in 2014 and it would still take a couple of years for DeFi and DAOs to catch on. We 
will, then, return to this problem in chapter five where we will delve into the relationship between 
Decentralized organizations and compliance duties.  
Shifting now to a more nitty-gritty analysis of the strategy applied, the main fallacy of the fencing 
approach was underestimating the criminogenic potential of the crypto -market. This is from two 
main perspectives. 
First, solely monitoring the entry and exit points to the crypto -market means intra -market 
transactions are left to the wild west. Without any control, criminals are free to layer their proceeds 
and blur the money trail so that the intermediary at the exit point may find it very difficult to 
ascertain the illicit source of the proceeds. This problem is magnified by the exclusion  of crypto-
to-crypto exchangers. Criminals can move their proceeds across different coins and, hence, 
ledgers, to reduce the releva nce of blockchain transparency. This behaviour, known as “chain 
hopping” 196 has been proven  to be used by money launderers and to be effective in hiding the 
source of ill-gotten funds.197  
 
Form a regulatory perspective, this means that fostering market efficiency, protecting investors, safeguarding financial stab ility 
and any other regulatory goal became much more complicated when confronted with crypto finance”. 
195 For an in-depth analysis see chapter 5 entirely devoted to the regulation of Decentralized Autonomous 
Organizations. 
196 A. Moiseienko – O. Kraft, From money mules to chain hopping. Targeting the finances of cybercrime, Royal United 
Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies, London, 2018, 40 – 41; O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, 
“Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 26, defines chain hopping as “The act of 
switching from one infrastructure to another, or from one digital asset to another, often in quick succession, in order to ev ade 
tracking attempts”; TRM Labs, Compliance in the second age of digital assets: How crypto compliance programs are evolving 
in 2023, cit., 16. 
197 European Banking Authority, Report with advice to the Commission on crypto-assets, cit., 21; G. Forgang, Money 
Laundering through Cryptocurrencies in Economic Crime Forensics Capstones , 2019, 4, 12; Chainalysis, The 2022 
Cryptocrime Report, cit., 20; Elliptic, Financial Crime Typologies in cryptoassets. The concise guide for Compliance Leaders, 
 157 
The risk is that, even when the individual does use an intermediary and all money laundering 
controls are carried out, the criminal source of the money will be so far away to be imperceptible. 
As the criminal activity happened too far down the chain of transactions.   
Second, solely regulating the point of contact underestimates the potential for  crypto-native 
activities to be used for money laundering. If, in the beginning, crypto was solely a coin, with time 
many other activities have flourished. Criminals can use such different implementations  – as 
ICOs,198 NFTs, DeFi – to invest their proceeds and launder money inside the market. Detecting 
money laundering then becomes exceedingly complex as the funds exchanged are the proceeds of 
such underlying legitimate activity with limited possibility of going back to the roots of the 
investment.  
Finally, as merchant s are excluded under the anti -money laundering legislation any purchase in 
crypto-assets falls out of the purview of the controls.199 
In this sense, the strategy of the policymaker seems partial as it tries to create checkpoints in a 
market that has no fixed entry -exit points and underestimates the anti -money laundering risk 
connected to the crypto-market per se. 
The last criticality of this first regulatory wave is that both wallet providers and exchangers offer a 
parallel non-regulated business model.  
As mentioned above, custodian wallet providers are not the only option available. Non-custodian 
wallet providers can also be used to store tokens.200 The peer-to-peer nature of crypto-assets makes 
their custody more similar to cash rather than traditional digital currencies. The individual has a 
choice on whether they prefer to store their cash in a safe – or under their mattress – or in a bank. 
Non-custodian wallet providers are explicitly excluded from the purview of the Directive. This is 
 
London, 2020, 41; C. Pelker Alden – C. Brown – R. Tucker, Using Blockchain Analysis from Investigation to 
Trial, cit., 62 – 63. 
198 G. Forgang, Money Laundering through Cryptocurrencies, cit., 17. 
199 This risk is currently limited as the use of crypto-assets as a means of payment is reduced, however, were 
crypto to gain a more widespread adoption, it would constitute a fundamental blind spot, as underlined by 
US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 34, “ the ability to use 
virtual assets to pay for goods and services is increasing . While some merchants may use third -party services that have 
AML/CFT obligations, the growing use of virtual assets as payment for goods and services could decrease the role of centralized 
VASPs”. 
200 Out of the sample analysed by G. Hileman – M. Rauchs, Global cryptocurrency benchmarking study, cit., only 
27 percent of wallet providers managed their users’ private keys. 
 158 
a sensible choice as the provider has, in this case, no control over the funds and simply provides a 
means to store them. However, it leaves opens the possibility for criminals to simply migrate from 
custodian to non-custodian options.201 In response to this possibility, the legislator has, further 
down the road, suggested that self -hosted solutions – as peer-to-peer transactions or self-hosted 
wallets – could be deemed as automatically high risk. 202 We will return to this in the next chapter 
as this is a regulatory strand characteristic of the latest regulations and, in particular, of what we 
referred above as the Phase three legislations.  
In a similar fashion as wallet providers, Virtual Currency Exchangers have a disintermediated twin: 
decentralized exchangers. With the term decentralized we do not necessarily refer to an exchanger 
that functions through smart contracts as a Decentralized Autonomous Organization. Rather, 
these exchangers are decentralized in the sense that they simply match supply and demand.203 Most 
of them are similar to a Craigslist where people willing to sell crypto -assets post their offer and 
can be contacted by the buyer. The sale is, then, usually executed peer -to-peer outside of the 
website; even though some of these websites do charge a commission this is not the rule. Some 
commentators believe decentralized exchangers can be included within the scope of the Directive 
through an extensive interpre tation.204 However, this extension is not automatic, especially when 
such platforms perform this bulletin board activity not only for crypto-assets but for a wide array 
of goods. It is also questionable whether it is correct to burden such basilar services with 
demanding duties as those provided by the anti-money laundering legislation. 
The Directive does not provide for a definition of exchanger, however, under the FATF definition 
it is uncertain whether decentralized exchanger s would fall under the purview of the regulation. 
 
201 L. Haffke – M. Fromberger – P. Zimmermann, Cryptocurrencies and anti-money laundering: the shortcomings of 
the fifth AML Directive (EU) and how to address them, cit., 11. 
202 See in this sense the amending guideline by European Banking Authority, Consultation Paper Guidelines 
amending Guidelines EBA/2021/02 on customer due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions should 
consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist financing risk associated with individual business relationships and 
occasional transactions (‘The ML/TF Risk Factors Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/849, 
Paris, 2023, 4 - 5 “acknowledges that transactions with self-hosted addresses (…) may expose them to increased ML/TF 
risk” 
203 European Banking Authority, Opinion on “Virtual Currencies”,  cit., 14. The topic of decentralized 
exchangers functioning as a DAO - or DEX – will be covered in chapter 5 of the thesis where the regulation 
of decentralized arrangements will be assessed.  
204 L. Haffke – M. Fromberger – P. Zimmermann, Cryptocurrencies and anti-money laundering: the shortcomings of 
the fifth AML Directive (EU) and how to address them, cit., 10. 
 159 
Namely, one of the three requisites to be qualified as an exchanger, under the Guidance, is to 
charge a fee for their activity.  
The meaning of fee is key in identifying the regulatory perimeter. Eminently, even if the platform 
were to mandate a subscription fee for posting, this would not necessarily be enough . Eminently, 
the letter of the law requires a commission . Depending on the interpretation of the term 
commission the solution would significantly change. If for commission is  meant a fee to be paid 
when the exchange is carried out and proportional to the exchange a subscription fee would, hence, 
not be enough .205 However, if for commission is meant an economic gain connected with the 
users’ activity, then a user fee may be sufficient.  
Going back to the roots of the distinction we may propend for an interpretation rooted in the 
transaction model. Eminently, the possibility for control is rooted in the intermediation of the 
transaction. In this sense, exchangers that simply facilitate the encounter of two parties shall be 
excluded as they miss the concrete ability to control the transaction – and even the ability to tell if 
the transaction was ever carried out . However, if the transaction is carried out through the 
exchanger’s system or is facilitated by them then the fee requisite becomes relevant. If the ratio of 
only regulating intermediaries that charge a fee is to impose costly compliance burdens based on 
economic gain, then any economic gain connected with the service  should justify the imposition 
of controls. It seems hence reasonable in such cases to assimilate decentralized exchangers to the 
same regime as centralized exchangers. 
 
2. The second phase. The Regulation of the Market 
 
 
205 In this sense see the EtherDelta case where the presence of a fee was considered a key characteristic in 
the evaluation regarding the qualification of the decentralized exchanger as a CASP as described by The 
law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 87 – 88. 
 160 
The year 2018 – with the amendment by the Financial Action Task Force of its Glossary 206 to 
introduce a new definition of virtual asset 207 and virtual asset service provider208 – marks the end 
of what we have labelled “first phase” and the beginning of a new strategy for the anti -money 
laundering regulation of crypto-asset. The Glossary’s amendment was followed by the publication 
in 2019 of a new Guidance by the FATF on virtual assets and virtual asset service providers. 209 
The revised standards encompass five new categories of covered entities (so -called, Virtual Asset 
Service Providers) and mark the beginning of the era of intra -market regulation in the field of 
crypto-assets.210 
The FATF provides two main explanations for its change in approach and the connected 
expansion in the number of covered entities.211  
First, the introduction and continuous expansion of new services and technologies – as 
Anonymity-enhanced Crypto -assets (so -called privacy coins or AECs), 212 mixers,213 etc. – that 
facilitate the obfuscation of the blockchain transaction trail and increase the anti-money laundering 
risk of intra-market transactions.214 Second, the advent of new business models, in particular Initial 
 
206 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 6. 
207 For an analysis of this definition see the previous section. 
208 See the definition at the Financial Action Task Force’s glossary, https://www.fatf-
gafi.org/en/pages/fatf-glossary.html  
209 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit. 
210 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 18 “Countries should address the ML/TF risks associated with VA activities, both where those activities intersect with 
the regulated fiat currency financial system, as appropriate under their national legal frameworks, which may offer various 
options for regulating such activity, as well as where such activities may not involve the fiat currency financial system but consist 
only of “virtual-to-virtual” interactions (e.g., as in the case of exchanges between one or more forms of VA)” 
211 See Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk -based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset service 
providers, cit., 6, “the virtual asset ecosystem has seen the rise of anonymity -enhanced cryptocurrencies (AECs), mixers and 
tumblers, decentralized platforms and exchanges, and other types of products and services that enable or allow for reduced 
transparency and increased ob fuscation of financial flows, as well as the emergence of other virtual asset business models or 
activities such as initial coin offerings (ICOs) that present ML/TF risks, including fraud and market manipulation risks. 
Further, new illicit financing typolo gies continue to emerge, including the increasing use of virtual -to-virtual layering schemes 
that attempt to obfuscate transactions in a comparatively easy, cheap and secure manner”; Elliptic, Financial Crime Typologies 
in cryptoassets. The concise guide for Compliance Leaders, cit., 34. 
212 World Economic Forum, Pathways to the Regulation of Crypto-Assets: A Global Approach, cit., 8. 
213 B. Villányi, Money laundering: History, regulations, and techniques, cit., 7. 
214 US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 17; M. Campbell-
Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto -coins, and global anti -money laundering governance, cit., 298; I. Karasek -Wojciechowicz, 
Reconciliation of anti-money laundering instruments and European data protection requirements in permissionless blockchain 
spaces, cit., 14. 
 161 
Coin Offerings (ICOs), 215 that generate new criminal risks completely internal to the market. 
Through these newly introduced business models, financial crime (as fraud or market 
manipulation) can be perpetrated without any connection with the outer world – i.e., the traditional 
financial system. These two factors combined enhance, according to the FATF, the risk profile of 
intra-market transactions calling for a more active role of financial integrity within the market. The 
strategy of mere containment is not enough anymore as the market cannot (if ever) be controlled 
through the sole policing of its entry and exit points.  
As mentioned, the Guidance of 2019 introduces five categories of Virtual Assets Service Providers 
(VASP), adding, hence, four new categories of covered entities.  
A VASP is, under the new Guidance: 
“any natural or legal person who is not covered elsewhere under the Recommendation and as a business conducts 
one or more of the following activities or operations for or on behalf of another natural or legal person: i) Exchange 
between virtual assets and fiat currencies; ii) Exchange between one or more forms of virtual assets; iii) Transfer of 
virtual assets; iv) Safekeeping and/or administration of virtual assets or instruments enabling control over virtual 
assets; v) Participation in and provision of financial services related to an issuer’s offer and/or sale of a virtual 
asset”. 
In line with the new approach, the Guidance expressly specifies that, in contrast to the restriction 
in scope imposed in 2015, the FATF standards include both providers that offer crypto-to-crypto 
and crypto-to-fiat services.216  
To better clarify the scope and meaning of these newly introduced categories, the FATF published 
a third Guidance in 2021.217 This Guidance is a key element in better understanding the concrete 
scope of the FATF’s rules. Let’s delve, then, into these new categories to assess their concrete 
features.   
 
215 A. Delivorias, Understanding initial coin offerings. A new means of raising funds based on blockchain, cit.; D. Boreiko 
– G. Ferrarini – P. Giudici, Blockchain startups and prospectus regulation, cit., 665. 
216 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 14, due to the FATF’s lexicon the Guidance uses the term virtual-to-virtual and virtual-to-fiat, however, 
to ease the understanding we use consistently throughout the text the term crypto. 
217 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit. 
 162 
In general terms, the Guidance clarifies that the five categories of VASPs should be interpreted 
broadly with a functional, activity-based approach. The supervisor should, then, always undertake 
an independent analysis of the intermediaries’ business model to autonomously evaluate whether 
the intermediary falls within one of the five covered activities. 218 This is of particular importance 
in the crypto-assets market considering the propensity of developers – mainly in order to intercept 
the hype of decentralization – of branding their products as DAOs, DeFi, etc. even in the absence 
of a truly decentralized  model. It is, hence, crucial for supervisors to autonomously assess the 
business model so to understand the service provided and the level of concrete decentralization.219 
In this sense, the FATF clarifies that, in contrast with the previous Guideline, the new one aims at 
covering nearly all intermediaries that act in the crypto-market. If the previous Guideline carefully 
circumscribed its purview, here the aim is to encompa ss any business that provides services to 
third parties, apart from a carefully demarcated list of excluded entities. This is clarified by the 
Guidance itself which states: 
“Despite the many and frequently changing marketing terms and innovative business models developed in this 
sector, the FATF envisions very few VA arrangements without VASPs involved at some stage if countries apply 
the definition correctly”.220 
Notwithstanding this ample approach, there are still certain services explicitly excluded from the 
purview of the anti -money laundering regulation: the providers of ancillary services that do not 
engage in the delivery or facilitation of any covered activity and the services that solely facilitate 
the functioning of the crypto-assets network.221 
 
218 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 24-25. 
219 In this sense also US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 3; 
European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document Accompanying the document Report from the Commission 
to the European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of the risk of money laundering and terrorist financing affecting 
the internal market and relating to cross -border activities, cit., 95, “ in case a person or a managing body can be identified, 
despite its qualification, the DeFi application shall be treated as a crypto -assets services provider and fall under the same 
AML/CFT obligations (…) DEFIs may be subjected to the application of the re levant rules covering crypto - assets on a 
case-by-case basis”.to 
220 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 30 
221 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 32. 
 163 
The expression ancillary services identifies all those services that facilitate the functioning of the 
market without direct involvement in the management of the individuals’ funds – examples being 
hardware wallet manufacturers, providers of unhosted wallets, cloud services, etc.222 In the absence 
of any direct involvement in the underlying activity and in the management of the funds, the 
exclusion aims at not imposing an unreasonable burden on entities that simply provide the means 
for the market to function smoothly. The distinctio n between ancillary and covered activities 
becomes, however, increasingly blurred when it comes to entities that function in a decentralized 
fashion. A classic example being decentralized exchangers. In these cases, tracing the line between 
facilitation without management and direct involvement is a complex exercise. When the service 
is functionally very similar to that provided by a covered entity, defining ancillary activity is crucial 
to avoid surreptitious circumventions of the compliance duties. For th is reason, as described in 
the following sections, the FATF has provided specific guidance on how to distinguish between 
covered and excluded services.  
Services that facilitate the functioning of the network  means those that are purposeful to the 
overall functioning of the network and not to the activity of one specific user. Decentralized 
networks, due to the absence of a central management body, rely for their functioning on the 
cooperative activity of the commun ity. In contrast to centralized networks, where the ledger is 
owned by an entity that both provides the service and maintains/updates it, decentralized networks 
are not owned by anyone. This make s their update/maintenance a qualitatively different activity 
compared with the provision of services to individual users. Several autonomous entities – natural 
and legal persons – participate in the maintenance, update, and day -to-day functioning of the 
network. Within this category , we can include miners, core developers,  and blockchain nodes. 
Some of these may pursue this activity for profit in a corporate form – as is the case for most 
miners nowadays – others may do it as a form of public service – as is usually the case for nodes. 
The main discriminating factor between these entities and the covered ones is that the service 
provided by facilitators is not directly connected with a single user. Rather  it is directed to the 
functioning of the network as a whole and, hence, is only indirectly functional to the provision of 
services to single users. For instance, while it is true that miners provide a vital service to individual 
users, as they bundle their transactions in a new block and compute the hash permitting the 
confirmation of individual transactions, the service is only indirectly provided to the users. Namely, 
 
222 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 25. 
 164 
mining is primarily functional to the operation of the network as a whole and is only indirectly 
beneficial to single users. 
Having analysed the exclusions, let’s now shift to the analysis of what is included. The starting 
point is the textual definition of VASP. Following the Guidance any covered entity must share 
three general characteristics, irrespective of the concrete activity pursued:223 i) it has to be a natural 
or legal person; ii) it has to conduct the activity as a business, excluding, hence, entities that act 
occasionally or for non -commercial reasons. The activity has, hence, to be provided on a 
sufficiently regular basis and for business purposes; iii) the service has to be provided for, or on 
behalf of a third party, excluding, hence, all merely internal activities – as intra-group transfers or 
services.  
Finally, the definition excludes from its purview any entity covered elsewhere under the 
Recommendations, making Virtual Assets Service Providers, as Virtual Assets, a residual 
category.224 
If these are the general coordinates of the Guidance, let’s now shift our focus toward the analysis 
of each of the five categories that make up the definition of Virtual Asset Service Provider. 
 
2.1 Exchangers 
 
The first activity enumerated by the Guidance is the provision of exchange services. Under the 
renewed approach these include both crypto -to-fiat (limb one) and crypto-to-crypto transactions 
(limb two), significantly expanding the scope of covered activities. To be qualified as an exchanger, 
the entity does not have to necessarily manage every element of the exchange but can play several 
 
223 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based  approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 25. 
224 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 25. 
 165 
roles. As clarified by the Guidance, it can act either as “a principal, as a central counterparty for clearing 
or settling transactions, as an executing facility or as another intermediary facilitating the transaction”.225 
This expansion is certainly welcome as it adjusts the regulation to the concrete risk factors of the 
market, addressing one of the main loopholes identified in the previous section: the absence of 
intra-blockchain controls which facilitated chain -hopping and intra -market frauds. Further, it 
rationalizes the policy approach by equating, in terms of compliance duties, activities that are 
qualitatively similar, as exchanges of fiat and crypto. Finally, compared with the previous definition, 
the one provided by  this Guidance is less detailed and more activity -oriented. If the previous 
definition identified exchangers through a description of their business model, the current one 
solely focuses on the result of the activity – the exchange of crypto with crypto or fiat – irrespective 
of the means used. In a multifaced market like the crypto-one, where new business models emerge 
daily, this approach makes the definition better equipped to stand the test of time. Also, it permits 
to avoid that small twitches in the business model can allow to circumvent compliance duties.  
Notwithstanding the clarification, the definition still leaves open several interpretative doubts. Two 
areas that are of particular relevance.  
The first, and arguably most controversial, category is that of decentralized exchangers. With the 
term decentralized we do not refer, in this case, to services that function autonomously through 
smart contracts (so -called DEXes, which impact will be analysed in chapter five devoted to 
decentralized services). Rather we refer to exchangers that solely match the supply and demand of 
crypto-assets to, then, enable peer -to-peer exchanges. 226 In this sense, the exchanger is 
decentralized as it does not directly manage the trade of value but simply connects the two parties 
that then transact in a decentralized fashion. As abovementioned, the exclusion of such exchangers 
was already a matter of concern in 2015. The exclusion of these providers created a significant 
break in the fence the regulator was trying to build around the crypto market. At the same time, 
imposing compliance duties on a service that basically acts as a bulletin board for sales of crypto -
assets without any direct involvement in the management of funds  seemed excessive as well as a 
potential breach of the proportionality principle and risk -based approach. The solution adopted 
 
225 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 26. 
226 Elliptic, Financial Crime Typologies in cryptoassets. The concise guide for Compliance Leaders, cit., 14. 
 166 
by the FATF in 2019 is to exclude all services that only act as a match-makers between buyers and 
sellers without any involvement in the custody or transfer of the assets.  
Eminently, the Guidance states: 
“Only entities that provide very limited functionality falling short of exchange, transfer, safekeeping, 
administration, control, and the provision of financial services associated with issuance will generally not be a 
VASP. For example, this may include websites which offer only a forum for buyers and sellers to identify and 
communicate with each other without offering, even in part, those services which are included in the definition of 
VASP”.227 
The crux is, hence, the management of the funds. Only if the service manages, through custody or 
transfer, the customer’s funds can it be qualified as a VASP. This choice seems to be proportionate 
considering the purposes of the regulation and the associat ed risk factor. Eminently, it is only 
through the concrete management of the funds that the provider can assess the risk factor of its 
customer and evaluate the associated anti-money laundering compliance duties.  
A second contentious element, concerning the scope of the term exchanger, is connected with so-
called crypto-kiosks or ATMs. Kiosks are machines, visually very similar to an ATM, that allow 
individuals to convert cash into cryptos and vice versa .228 With classic ATMs the problem of 
compliance is virtually non-existent. The withdrawal or deposit of fiat is always connected with a 
bank account or other intermediary that will, in turn, be responsible for the controls. However, 
due to the structure of blockchain accounts , a crypto ATM can be used to send tokens to a self-
hosted wallet. In such a case, the absence of an intermediary on either side of the transaction 
means that no one oversees it and applies the relevant controls. This begs the question of whether 
the owner of the ATM should be qualified as  a covered entity per se . The risk is of particula r 
relevance as ATMs allow for cash -to-crypto and crypto-to-cash transactions. This means that, if 
 
227 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 35; a similar approach is taken by the US FinCEN, see FinCEN, Application of FinCEN’s 
Regulations to Certain Business Models Involving Convertible Virtual Currencies, cit., 24, “if a CVC trading platform only 
provides a forum where buyers and sellers of CVC post their bids and offers (with or without automatic matching of 
counterparties), and the parties themselves settle any matched transactions through an outside venue (either through individual 
wallets or other wallets not hosted by the trading platform), the trading platform does not qualify as a money transmitter under 
FinCEN regulations”. 
228 Elliptic, Financial Crime Typologies in cryptoassets. The concise guide for Compliance Leaders, cit., 19. 
 167 
the crypto-asset is sent to a self-hosted wallet, not only there is no control on the crypto side, but 
that also the fiat side of the transaction is virtually unmonitored.229  
At the same time, the occasional nature of such transactions and the same architecture of ATMs 
(based on human -to-machine rapid interactions) make it hard to implement controls. A blanket 
implementation of compliance duties could simply push kiosks out of business. The Guidance of 
2019 does not take a clear stance on the point. ATMs are left in a grey area as they “may” fall 
within the definition of exchanger. 230 The choice is fundamentally left to National authorities as 
the Guidance states: 
“Some jurisdictions may consider the use of VA kiosks (…) as an occasional transaction, whereby the provider or 
owner/operator of the kiosk and the customer using the kiosk transact on a one-off basis. Other jurisdictions may 
not consider such transactions to be occasional, with resulting consequences for CDD obligations”.231 
Mind you, this does not mean that ATM transactions are completely out of the purview of anti -
money laundering controls. Rather, if a jurisdiction decides to qualify exchanges through kiosks as 
occasional transactions, then – following Recommendation 10 - the related compliance duties are 
only triggered above a designated threshold. The threshold for crypto-assets is currently set at one 
thousand euros/dollars. 232 Hence, even when exempted under national law as occasional 
transactions, such exemption only applies to exchanges under the threshold.  
To sum up, the Guidance expands the scope of the category of exchanger by adding crypto -to-
crypto transfers and introducing a general, activity -based definition that focuses on the concrete 
management of the customer’s funds by the covered entity.  
  
 
229 Elliptic, Financial Crime Typologies in cryptoassets. The concise guide for Compliance Leaders, 19. 
230 In contrast the US FinCEN expressly includes kiosks operators among the covered entities, see FinCEN, 
Application of FinCEN’s Regulations to Certain Business Models Involving Convertible Virtual Currencies, cit., 18, “An 
owner-operator of a CVC kiosk who uses an electronic terminal to accept currency from a customer and transmit the equivalent 
value in CVC (or vice versa) qualifies as a money transmitter both for transactions receiving and dispensing real currency or  
CVC”. 
231 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 49. 
232 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 40 – 41. 
 168 
2.2 Transfer  
 
The second category of services covered by the Guidance (third limb) are those that facilitate the 
transfer of crypto-assets. Transfer services, together with wallet providers (limb four), serve as an 
all-compassing category for any entity that provides funds management services within a certain 
coin. If exchangers cover most (if not any) intermediated transaction between markets (whether 
crypto or fiat), limbs three and four cover most (if not any) intermediated transaction within a 
certain blockchain. In conjunct, these two categories cover any service that provides static (wallet 
providers) and dynamic (transfer) intermediation with a certain coin market.  
Transfer services are defined as: 
“any service allowing users to transfer ownership, or control of a VA to another user or to transfer VAs between 
VA addresses or accounts held by the same user”.233 
The Guidance further clarifies that covered transfers are not only the one s carried out on-chain 
(meaning between two blockchain accounts) but also the ones happening off -chain. This 
clarification is connected with a business model that has been adopted by a growing number of 
intermediaries234 – especially wallet providers. As analysed in chapter two, the decentralization of 
blockchain means the transaction system is quite cumbersome. Transfers of crypto -assets take 
time and money, with costs growing in parallel with the price of crypto. To avoid such costs, 
certain intermediaries have started to pool all their customers’ tokens in proprietary accounts and 
then manage individual accounts through a private ledger – as a traditional bank would do. When 
two customers of the same intermediary exchange crypto-assets, these transactions are registered 
off-chain – meaning there is no modification in the ownership on the blockchain ledger but only 
in the intermediaries’ ledger. Such transactions may have been technically not considered as crypto 
transfers (as nothing is registered in the blockchain ledger). For this reason, the FATF clarified the 
 
233 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 26. 
234 A. Blandin et al., 3rd Global Cryptoasset Benchmarking Study, cit., 39-40; on the use of off chain transaction 
also by disintermediated arrangements see O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” 
finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 14.  
 169 
extension of compliance duties to any transfer irrespective of whether these happen on -chain or 
off-chain.235 
Apart from this clarification, the definition of transfer services is quite straightforward covering 
any entity facilitating transfer of values between crypto -assets accounts or customers (in the case 
of off-chain transactions). 
The inclusion of transfer services is also relevant as it addresses an important risk factor of the 
crypto-market: Mixers or Tumblers.236  
These services are so-called privacy-enhancing services as they provide blockchain’s users with the 
possibility of blurring the transaction trail associated with their coins. 237 As analysed, while 
pseudonymous, the blockchain is extremely transparent in terms of transaction trail. 238 All 
transactions are registered in a single, public ledger. This means that anyone can follow the money 
connected with a certain account. To address this privacy loophole, Mixers provide a means to 
blur the transaction trail and hamper traceability. To th is end, these software filter and randomly 
reallocate a group of incoming transactions to target accounts, making it extremely difficult to 
match the sending account to the receiving one.239 This way they break the link between sender 
 
235 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 26. 
236 G. Forgang,, Money Laundering Through Cryptocurrencies, cit., 16; US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance 
Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 17; Elliptic, Financial Crime Typologies in cryptoassets. The concise guide 
for Compliance Leaders, cit., 30; C. Pelker Alden – C. Brown – R. Tucker, Using Blockchain Analysis from 
Investigation to Trial, cit., 63. 
237 C. Berggren – J. Asplund, Identifying and Analyzing Digital Payment Flows Regarding Illegal Purposes on the 
Internet: I Samarbete Med Cgi Och Finanskoalitionen, Independent thesis advanced level, Linköping University, 
2016, 26; M. Nadler – F. Schär, Tornado Cash and Blockchain Privacy: A Primer for Economists and Policymakers, 
cit., 1. 
238 World Economic Forum, Pathways to the Regulation of Crypto-Assets: A Global Approach, cit., 8; M. Campbell-
Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global anti-money laundering governance, cit., 298. 
239 See the definition of A. Jakubenko, et. al., Anonymization Technologies of Cryptocurrency Transactions as Money 
Laundering Instrument, in KnE Social Sciences, 3, 2, 2018, 48, “ A Mixer sends transactions through a complex, semi -
random series of dummy transactions that makes it extremely difficult to link specific virtual coins (addresses) with a particular 
transaction. Mixer services operate by receiving instructions from a user to send funds to a particular bitcoin address. The 
mixing service then “commingles” this transaction with other user transactions, so that it becomes unclear to whom the user 
intended the funds to be directed”. See also, M. Nadler – F. Schär, Tornado Cash and Blockchain Privacy: A Primer for 
Economists and Policymakers , cit., 2; for an example of mixer functioning see M. Möser – R. Böhme – D. 
Breuker, An inquiry into money laundering tools in the Bitcoin ecosystem , in 2013 APWG eCrime Researchers Summit, 
2013, 3. 
 170 
and receiver address, hence, reducing the usefulness (in anti -money laundering terms) of 
blockchain’s transparency.240  
Privacy-enhancing technologies are not criminal per se, as account holders may use them to address 
legitimate privacy concerns . Nevertheless, these services have been heavily used by criminals. 241 
Under the first policy wave, Mixers were excluded from the purview of the regulation as they did 
not provide exchange or asset management services. However, with the introduction of transfer 
services as covered entities, Mixers now, arguably, fall under the purview of the regulation as they 
technically intermediate the transfer of crypto -assets from one account to the other. 242 This is 
certainly a welcome addition as it closes a relevant loophole in the previous framework. 
 
2.3 Safekeeping  
 
The fourth limb of the Guidance extends the regulation to a category already familiar to the 
European anti -money laundering legislation: wallet providers. Like the Fifth Directive, the 
Guidance only encompasses custodian wallet providers excluding those providers merely offering 
software or hardware  non custodian services  – which are framed within the above -analysed 
category of ancillary services.243  
 
240 M. Nadler – F. Schär, Tornado Cash and Blockchain Privacy: A Primer for Economists and Policymakers, cit., 3; 
Elliptic, Financial Crime Typologies in cryptoassets. The concise guide for Compliance Leaders, cit., 30; Financial Action 
Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset Service Providers, cit., 
72-73. 
241 M. Nadler – F. Schär, Tornado Cash and Blockchain Privacy: A Primer for Economists and Policymakers, cit., 4. 
For a very recent case we can refer to Tornado Cash, a decentralized mixer that was sanctioned by the US 
Department of Treasury (OFAC) for having laundered more than 7 billion dollars since its creation 
including 455 million dollars connected with the North Korean hacker collective Lazarus Group. For more 
information regarding the case and connected allegations see the press release by OFAC 
https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0916  
242 The Same approach taken was taken by the US FinCEN in 2019, see FinCEN, Application of FinCEN’s 
Regulations to Certain Business Models Involving Convertible Virtual Currencies, cit., 19, “ An anonymizing services 
provider is a money transmitter under FinCEN regulations. The added feature of concealing the source of the transaction does 
not change that person’s status under the BSA”. 
243 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 29, “ Firms which merely provide ancillary infrastructure to allow another entity to offer this service 
(…) will not normally satisfy this definition. Nor does this limb typically cover software developers or providers of unhoste d 
 171 
At the same time, the Guidance sensibly widens the scope of the term custodian wallet provider 
compared to the preceding Union’s approach. This expansion is carried out through a more 
expansive definition of safekeeping and also adding a second category of  activities that fall under 
this limb: the administration of crypto-assets. 
The first activity, safekeeping, is defined as the “service of holding a VA or the private keys to the VA on 
behalf of another person”.244  The FATF closes the  textual loophole identified above, eliminating the 
distinction between providers that store the private key and those that directly store the tokens. 
Under this limb, any form of safekeeping, as long as it implies direct control of the tokens on 
behalf of a third  party, is qualified as a covered activity. The second activity, administration, 
includes “the concept of managing VAs for or on behalf of another person ”. The main difference being, 
fundamentally, the aim of the service provided. With the former aimed at safekeeping and the 
latter at management.245  
More in general, the FATF identifies  one element as key in ascertaining whether an entity falls 
within or outside the regulatory corral: control. Covered entities under limb four are all those:  
“that have the ability to exercise control over VAs (…) The term “control” should be understood as the ability to 
hold, trade, transfer or spend the VA. Parties that can use a VA or change its disposition have control of it”246 
The Guidance further clarifies that the control does not even have to be exclusive to qualify as a 
covered activity. The activity qualifies as covered even when the customer retains a certain level of 
control over their account – as in multi-signatory arrangements.247 
 
wallets whose functions are only developing and/or selling the software//hardware However, countries must look at individual 
facts and circumstances in applying the definition for specific cases”. 
244 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 29 
245 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 16. 
246 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based  approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 29. 
247 The Guidance clarifies that the control does not even have to be exclusive to qualify as covered activity, 
Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset Service 
Providers, cit., 30, “ As in the definition of “transfer”, this does not mean the control must be unilateral. “Control” can 
include circumstances where keys or credentials held by others are required in order to change the assets disposition, such a s 
multi-signature processes. The existence of a multi -signature model or models in which multiple parties must use keys for a 
transaction to happen does not mean a particular entity does not maintain control, depending on the extent of the influence i t 
may have over the VAs”. For multi-signatory it is meant a type of custodian arrangement that only allows to 
transfer the coin with the use of two passwords. Usually, one of these passwords is held by the 
 172 
The new definition, taking into account the multiple and continuously evolving business models 
existing in the market, moves away, in a similar fashion as the exchanger definition, from a 
business-model centred definition. The European definition of custodians as solely the entities 
holding the private keys is substituted by an expansive, activity -based definition centred on the 
concept of control. Under this definition, any business that exercises, even partial or non-exclusive, 
control over crypto-assets for or on behalf of a third party is qualified as a covered entity.  
 
2.4 Participation in and provision of financial services related to an 
issuer’s offer and/or sale 
 
The last limb of the FATF’s definition of VASP is aimed at addressing an emerging business model 
that wreaked havoc in the crypto-market since 2016: Initial Coin Offerings.  
With prices of crypto through the roof, more and more individuals started to crave a piece of the 
crypto-cake. This demand has been met by an increasing number of crypto-projects. New tokens 
are marketed on a nearly monthly basis raising stellar amounts of money. One of the most 
common strategies to carry out such a crypto-offering is through so-called Initial Coin Offerings 
(ICO). An ICO consists in the issuance of a token in connection with a certain project (usually 
detailed by a white paper) as a means to raise early funding for the venture.248 The buyer of the 
token gains specific predetermined rights (the coins may be similar to bonds or stocks or a mix of 
the two concepts) and the issuer accrues funds to finance its venture. 249 In the, at least initial, 
absence of any clear regulation, these offerings flourished, raising millions of euros for projects 
that many times didn’t even have a line of code written, resulting in widespread fraud. 250 The 
 
administrator/safekeeper and one by the owner, meaning that, to transact or dispose of the coins, both 
parties need to agree. 
248 P. Hacker – C. Thomale, Crypto-securities regulation: ICOs, token sales and cryptocurrencies under EU financial law, 
cit., 646. 
249 D. Boreiko – G. Ferrarini – P. Giudici, Blockchain startups and prospectus regulation, cit., 666; P. Hacker – C. 
Thomale, Crypto-securities regulation: ICOs, token sales and cryptocurrencies under EU financial law, cit., 646 
250 See O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response? , cit., 
16 example of a rug pull fraud. 
 173 
Guidance of 2019 is the first attempt to regulate this practice through the imposition of anti-money 
laundering compliance duties. 
Notwithstanding the focus of the limb is on ICOs, the definition does not directly cover the 
token’s issuers. As clarified by the Guidance “ the sole act of issuing a VA, entirely on its own, is not a 
covered service under limb (v) of the VASP definition”.251 The covered activity is, hence, the provision of 
financial services in the context of “issuance, offer, sale, distribution, ongoing market circulation and trading 
of a VA ”.252 To be covered by anti -money laundering duties is, hence, not the entity issuing the 
token but the one that intermediates its sale and transfer.  
The reason of this exclusion, which, as we will see, recurs also in the Union’s discipline, is 
connected with the treatment of software developers. Software developers have been, up to now, 
considered excluded from the purview of compliance duties. The entity or person that simply 
creates an instrument, whether a crypto -asset or a Decentralized service, is not classified as a 
VASP.253 This exclusion is in line with the technology neutral approach of the sectorial regulation 
that aims at policing intermediaries engaging in a certain activity and not the technology per se or 
its creators. Imposing compliance duties on a software developer would entail demanding them to 
design the technology in a certain fashion, this way directly regulating the technology. As further 
analysed, this hands-off approach seems to be partially changing in the last years. We will further 
delve into this topic in chapter five devoted to the regulation of decentralized entities and software 
developers. 
 
251 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 30. 
252 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 30. 
253 In this sense also European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document Accompanying the document 
Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of the risk of money laundering 
and terrorist financing affecting the internal market and relating to cross-border activities,  cit., 95 “Another key concern also 
arise from crypto -assets exchange, lending or transfer services, activities normally offered by regulated crypto -assets services 
providers but made through decentralized or distributed application, often run on a decentralized ledger, with no legal or natural 
person with control or influence over it, often referred to as ‘decentralised finance’ (DeFi). There seems to be a broadly sh ared 
consensus among jurisdictions that DeFi applications should not be considered crypto -assets services providers if there is no 
identified body that can be held liable for their use”. For more on the regulation of decentralized arrangements and 
their developers see chapter 5. 
 174 
To sum up, as long as the issuer is solely designing and launching the token, as Nakamoto did, no 
compliance duty will be imposed. In contrast, if the issuer is also involved in the sale and/or 
transfer of the issued tokens then it would qualify as a covered entity. 
 
3. The Market in Crypto-assets Regulation 
 
As with our previous analysis concerning the definition of crypto-assets, the last piece of legislation 
we will examine is the Market in Crypto -assets Regulation (MiCaR). From a policy strategy 
perspective, the MiCaR follows the approach of the 2019 FATF Guidance in significantly 
expanding the number of covered entities compared with the Fifth Anti -Money La undering 
Directive.254 
Specifically, the MiCaR introduces ten categories of covered entities – labelled Crypto-assets 
Service Providers or CASPs. The MiCaR not only enlarges the scope to all the activities defined as 
covered – exchangers, wallet providers, transfer services, and offerors – under the FATF’s renewed 
definition,255 but further expands the concept of CASP to include new types of business models. 
The result is a list of covered entities encompassing nearly any intermediary operating within the 
crypto-market.  
Starting from the definition of Crypto -assets Service Providers, the MiCaR follows the FATF’s 
model defining a CASP as any entity with three characteristics: i) is a legal person or any other 
undertaking; ii) conducts the activity as a business, hence, providing its services on a professional 
basis; iii) provides services to third parties. 256 To these three elements, the MiCaR adds a fourth 
 
254 As underlined by European Banking Authority, EBA Report on the future of AML/CFT Framework in the 
EU, Paris, 2020, 36, the definition of CASP provided by the Fifth Anti -money Laundering Directive was 
no longer in line with the FATF’s Regulation; see also European Commission, Commission Staff Working 
Document Accompanying the document Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the 
assessment of the risk of money laundering and terrorist financing affecting the internal market and relating to cross -border 
activities,  cit., 100 
255 European Central Bank, Opinion of the European Central Bank on a proposal for a directive and a regulation on the 
prevention of the use of the financial system for the purposes of money laundering or terrorist financing, cit., 14. 
256 See article 3, para 8, “crypto-asset service provider’ means legal person or other undertaking whose occupation or business 
is the provision of one or more crypto -asset services to third parties on a professional basis, and are allowed to provide crypto -
asset services in accordance with Article 53”. 
 175 
one that is directly connected with its substantive discipline: to qualify as a CASP the entity has to 
be allowed to provide crypto -asset services in accordance with the Regulation. Namely, the 
Regulation introduces an authorization process for any CASP th at wishes to provide its services 
within the Union. We will further delve into this process in the following section.  
In addition to these overarching characteristics, to qualify as a CASP, the entity must provide one 
of the covered services as enumerated by article 3, para 9, MiCaR. These services are:  
“(a) the custody and administration of crypto-assets on behalf of third parties; (b) the operation of a trading 
platform for crypto-assets; (c)  the exchange of crypto-assets for funds; (d)  the exchange of crypto-assets for other 
crypto-assets; (e)  the execution of orders for crypto-assets on behalf of third parties; (f)  placing of crypto-assets; (fa) 
providing transfer services for crypto-assets on behalf of third parties; (g)  the reception and transmission of orders 
for crypto-assets on behalf of third parties; (h)  providing advice on crypto-assets; (hb) providing portfolio 
management on crypto-assets”. 
Crypto-asset Service Providers are not, however, the only regulated entities under MiCaR. In 
addition to CASPs, the Regulation provides for two additional categories of covered entities: the 
issuer and the offeror of crypto-assets. Both these entities are not classified as CASPs but are the 
object of a partially separate and customized discipline.  
Let’s then delve into these two additional categories. An issuer is defined as “ the natural or legal 
person or other undertaking who issues the crypto-assets”. An offeror is defined as a natural or legal person, 
or other undertaking, including the issuer, that offers crypto -assets to the public. An offer to the 
public is then defined as: 
“a communication to persons in any form and by any means, presenting sufficient information on the terms of the 
offer and the crypto-assets to be offered, so as to enable potential holders to decide whether to purchase those crypto- 
assets”. 
The Regulation, hence, breaks the issuance of a new crypto -asset in two fundamental moments, 
to which correspond two different entities: i) the technical design and issuance of the token – 
operated and managed by the issuer; ii) the offering of the token t o the public – operated and 
managed by the offeror.  
 176 
The first moment is loosely defined as the Regulation does not provide for a definition of issuance. 
We can, hence, infer that any activity consisting in the creation of a new type of token can be 
classified as issuance.  
The second moment is more clearly demarcated as a specific definition of crypto -assets offering 
is introduced. The definition is an exact copy of the one already provided for the offer of securities 
to the public by article 2, letter d), of the Prospectus Regulation. 257 The similarity places crypto -
assets offerings squarely within the purview of the larger European financial market regulation and 
underlines that the purpose of the legislator with MiCaR is to increasingly assimilate crypto-assets 
with any other classic financial instrument.  
The indexes laid out by the definition for an entity to be identified as offeror are fundamentally 
three: i) there needs to be a communication (which can be carried out with any means); ii) the 
communication needs to be addressed towards more than one person, although not necessarily to 
the general public (as underlined by the use of the plural persons); iii) the communication needs 
to be complete enough to enable the recipient to make a n informed choice regarding whether to 
buy the asset.  
These two phases of the token issuance can be managed by the same entity (as the offeror can also 
be the issuer) or by two different entities. This depends on whether the issuer solely designs the 
token and launches its protocol or if they are also involved in its, lato sensu, commercialization.  
While prima facie clear, tracing the line between mere issuance and offer will certainly be a complex 
exercise. Eminently, any activity of issuance does entail some form of communication as the 
developer has to, at the very least, gather enough contributors to initiate and maintain the network. 
Even a fully decentralized network as Bitcoin, required a certain organization for its launch. 
Nakamoto had to reach out to find core developers and early adopters eager to become nodes and 
 
257 Regulation of the European Union, 14th June 2017, n. 1129; the same goes, even though the similarity is 
less relevant considering the conciseness of the definitions, with the definition of issuer and offeror 
respectively defined by art. 3, lett. h and i; a part of the literature, as well as certain jurisdictions, had already 
argued in favour of the applicability of the Prospectus Regulation to Initial Coin Offerings, see D. Boreiko 
– G. Ferrarini – P. Giudici, Blockchain startups and prospectus regulation, cit., 670, in favour of the introduction 
of an ad hoc regime P. Hacker – C. Thomale, Crypto-securities regulation: ICOs, token sales and cryptocurrencies under 
EU financial law, cit., 649. 
 177 
mine the early blocks. When this outreach activity shall be deemed to have reached a level of 
sophistication sufficient to qualify as an offer will be a challenging interpretative exercise.258  
Even though it is still early to conclude for any interpretative solutions, this problem is very similar 
to the (relatively) long -standing one concerning the regulation of software developers in 
decentralized arrangements. Eminently, the reason why issuers are differentiated in terms of 
regulation from offerors is that, in a decentralized arrangement an issuer can design a token 
without retaining any control of the latter. In cases as such, the issuer is a software developer rather 
than a business providing a service. The service is provided by the token – and/or the decentralized 
arrangement259 – and not by the individual/s designing it.  
Since the introduction of crypto -assets, the legislator has been struggling with the if and how of 
the regulation of such arrangements. To differentiate between true software developers – not 
covered by the anti-money laundering legislation – and service providers, the FATF developed a 
series of indexes. These indexes will  most probably apply also to the issuer/offeror distinction. 
For a more detailed analysis of the topic, we refer to chapter five which delves into the regulation 
of decentralized autonomous organizations. 
To sum up, the MiCaR introduces three categories of covered entities: the CASPs (formed by ten 
sub-categories), the issuer, and the offeror. For each category , the MiCaR provides for a 
registration duty as well as several other obligations aimed at safeguarding investors and 
guaranteeing the solidity of the providers operating within the common market.  
The present analysis will be divided as follows. In the next section , we will analyse the ten 
categories of CASP introduced by the Regulation. We will then examine the authorization system 
introduced by MiCaR for CASPs, issuers and offerors. Finally, we will delve into the upcoming 
Anti-money Laundering Package to assess up to what extent it adopts the definitions introduced 
by the Regulation and how the  (typically financial) regulation of MiCaR will translate into the 
Union’s anti-money laundering framework. 
 
258 As underlined by H. Axelsen - J. Rude Jensen – R. Omri, When is a DAO Decentralized?, cit., 69, “no DAO 
can start decentralized, as any project must be initiated by a small core team, bootstrapping development until the project 
matures and attracts open-source contributors”. 
259 It is important to keep in mind that the creation of a DAOs many times coincides with the issuance of 
a new token (usually on top of a pre -existing token) that is used to fund, vote, and administer the 
organization.  
 178 
 
3.1 The definition of CASP 
 
The definition of CASP adopted by MiCaR is largely rooted  in the FATF’s definition of VASP 
adopted with the 2019 Guidance. The similitude applies to the overall definition of covered service 
provider as well as to its single subcategories. A large part of our analysis developed for the 
Guidance can, thus, be applied to MiCaR’s Crypto-assets Service Providers. However, the MiCaR 
also introduces new categories of regulated intermediaries hence further widening the policy reach. 
Let’s, then, analyse the definition of each category of covered entities as provided by the 
Regulation. 
 
3.1.1 The custodian wallet provider 
 
The first covered activity is a familiar one for the European anti -money laundering regulation: 
custodian wallet providers. Their activity is defined as:  
“safekeeping or controlling, on behalf of third parties, crypto-assets or the means of access to such crypto-assets, 
where applicable in the form of private cryptographic keys”. 
This definition adapts the previous one laid down by the Fifth Directive – that focused on the 
management of the private key – to the one adopted by the FATF.  
First, the management of the private key is now not a core factor for the qualification as covered 
entity but only one of the possible business models. Second, safekeeping is placed side by side with 
a second activity: controlling. This addition underlines that the key factor to qualify as a covered 
entity is the notion of control. A covered entity will, hence, be any service provider that has control 
over crypto-assets belonging to a third party, either directly or through the management of their 
private key.  
 179 
 
3.1.2 The platform operators and the exchangers 
 
The second category is the trading platform operator. This is a very interesting one as it is directly 
relevant to our earlier discussion on decentralized exchangers. Eminently, the category of platform 
operator seems to be significantly broader than the pre -existing one of exchangers. The former 
being defined by MiCaR as: 
“the management of one or more multilateral systems, which brings together or facilitates the bringing together of 
multiple third-party buying and selling interests for crypto-assets – in the system and in accordance with its rules - 
in a way that results in a contract, either by exchanging one crypto-asset for another, or a crypto-asset for funds”. 
This definition makes no direct reference to the management or transfer of funds nor the 
collection of a fee by the intermediary. The only requirement laid down is that the interactions the 
platform facilitates should result (or be aimed at) the conclusion of a contract for the exchange of 
crypto or of crypto -to-fiat between third parties . This is precisely the business model we have 
described for decentralized exchangers: meaning platforms that do not directly manage the 
exchange of funds but rather facilitate the match of demand and supply. Up to now, these entities, 
as long as they did not manage the exchange of funds, were excluded from the purview of the 
regulation. However, MiCaR seems to, quite explicitly, expand its scope to platforms that simply 
facilitate the conclusions of contracts without any direct management funds.  
This expansion is further confirmed if the third and fourth limb of the definition are considered. 
These limbs encompass the exchange of crypto -assets for funds and for other crypto -assets, 
defined as:  
“concluding purchase or sale contracts concerning crypto-assets with third parties against funds (or other crypto-
assets) by using proprietary capital” 
These two limbs precisely cover the business model of centralized exchangers that use own funds 
to exchange their customers’ funds. The addition of these two separate categories for centralized 
arrangements, further points in the direction of an expansion of the regulatory scope towards 
 180 
decentralized exchangers. The width of this expansion will depend on how supervisors will 
interpret the expression “in a way that results in a contract”. With the widest interpretation including 
platforms that simply facilitate the meeting of the will and the strictest requiring the facilitation of 
the conclusion and execution of the exchange contract.  
At the same time, it is important to underline that MiCaR is not an anti -money laundering 
legislation. Hence, this extension and the interpretation of the aforementioned expression may be 
different when the category is applied to anti-money laundering. Eminently, as we have explained, 
the main reason why decentralized exchangers were excluded was that they had no overview of 
the transaction flows. Eminently, they simply act as bulletin boards for sellers and buyers. Precisely 
for this reason, the FATF, in i ts 2021 Guidance, drew the line between covered and excluded 
entities focusing on the management of funds. As long as the entity is not managing funds it is 
excluded from the purview of the Guidance. Now, while MiCaR pushes for a further expansion, 
these factors will still need to be taken into account when defining a covered entity to ensure 
compliance duties match the concrete risk factor.  Namely, the mere creation of a marketplace is 
certainly relevant in terms of consumer and investor protection. However, the same activity is not 
necessarily pertinent to financial flows control. In the first sense, the marketplace does facilitate 
the encounter of supply and demand and, hence, has an understanding of the products offered. In 
the second sense, in the absence of direct management of the funds, the ability of the marketplace 
to assess anti-money laundering risk. 
 
3.1.3 The provision of transfer services 
 
The fifth category is the provision of transfer services, defined as:  
“transfer, on behalf of a natural or legal person, crypto-assets from one distributed ledger address or account to 
another”. 
This category is specular to the FATF’s transfer services one although partially more restrictive. If 
the Guidance expressly extended its purview also to off -chain transactions, here the definition 
seems to restrict its applicability only to on -chain ones. Eminently, the Regulation clearly states 
 181 
that the transfer has to happen between two DLT addresses or accounts. This would cut out off -
chain transactions that are carried out by the intermediary and recorded in its private, centralized 
ledger.  
 
3.1.4 The provision of advisory services and portfolio management 
 
The sixth category under MiCaR is the provision of advisory services. This activity is defined as: 
“offering, giving or agreeing to give personalised recommendations to a third party, either at the third party’s 
request or on the initiative of the crypto-asset service provider providing the advice, in respect of one or more 
transactions relating to crypto-assets, or the use of crypto-asset services”. 
The analysis of the rest of the Regulation points to a definition of advice as mainly connected with 
financial advice provided in connection with investments in crypto -assets. Eminently, if the 
expression used by the definition is quite broad and could pot entially cover other types of 
professional advice – as, for example, legal - the rest of the regulation consistently refers to the 
activity of facilitating the investment in crypto-assets and choosing an investment strategy. 
This is further underlined by the association of advisors with portfolio managers as the two 
categories are regulated by the same article – article 73 MiCaR. Indeed, portfolio managers can be 
framed as a custodian version of financial advisors. These are defined as the entities that: 
“manage portfolios in accordance with mandates given by clients on a discretionary client-by-client basis where such 
portfolios include one or more crypto-assets”. 
If the advisor also holds control of their clients’ funds can, hence, be classified as a portfolio 
manager.  
The exclusion does not imply that legal advice concerning crypto-assets will be out of the purview 
of the anti-money laundering regulation. Rather, the latter will be covered under the pre -existing 
anti-money laundering duties for the legal sector. 
 182 
 
3.1.5 The middlemen  
 
The last macro-category covered by the Regulation includes all those businesses that act as bridges 
between the offeror of crypto-assets and the potential buyers.  
These include: the execution of orders for crypto-assets, meaning: 
“concluding agreements to buy or to sell one or more crypto-assets or to subscribe for one or more crypto-assets on 
behalf of third parties and includes the conclusion of agreements to sell crypto-assets at the moment of their 
issuance”. 
Placing crypto-assets, defined as the: 
“marketing, on behalf of or for the account of the offeror or of a party related to the offeror, of crypto-assets to 
purchasers”. 
The reception and transmission of orders, meaning:  
“the reception from a person of an order to buy or to sell one or more crypto- assets or to subscribe for one or more 
crypto-assets and the transmission of that order to a third party for execution”. 
All mentioned activities can be assimilated to the FATF’s one of: “ participation in and provision of 
financial services related to an issuer’s offer and/or sale”.  
 
3.2 The authorization system 
 
Although not of direct relevance for anti -money laundering purposes, it is appropriate to sketch 
the content of MiCaR’s regulation beyond the definition of crypto -assets and CASP. Eminently, 
 183 
due to its relevance for the market’s regulation , the regulation will undoubtedly cross paths and 
influence the anti -money laundering regime. Specifically, one field where it will have a direct 
relevance is the registration of CASP. Eminently, Crypto -assets Service Providers are following 
the Fifth Directive under a registration duty. This regime will be partially substituted by the one 
provided by MiCaR.260 
The core of MiCaR is the discipline of crypto-assets’ issuance and offer to the public. To protect 
investors and reduce information asymmetries, a set of detailed rules are laid down regarding the 
who, when, and how of crypto-assets’ issuance. To the issuance of crypto-assets are devoted Title 
II, III, and IV divided following the tripartition among utility, asset -referenced, and e -money 
tokens detailed in the previous chapter. A second strand of regulation lays down registration 
requirements for CASP aimed at guaranteeing ex ante compliance with relevant regulations as well, 
once the registration is granted, Union-wide operativity – through so-called passporting.  
 
3.2.1  The offer of crypto-assets, other than asset-referenced tokens or e-
money tokens 
 
The first category to be regulated by MiCaR is a residual one comprising all crypto-assets that are 
not asset-referenced or e-money tokens. The issuance of such tokens is under a looser discipline 
compared with the other two categories.  
To issue this first type of token or apply for admission to a trading platform the Regulation 
mandates three fundamental requirements: 1) be a legal person; 2) draft, publish, and notify to the 
competent authority a white paper; 3) comply with a set of minimum standards (act honestly, treat 
token holders fairly and equally, avoid conflicts of interest, etc.). 
Key to this discipline is the regulation of the white paper. 261 The concept of a white paper is not 
new to the crypto-world. It is quite common for initial coin offerings, or any other token issuance, 
 
260 For a more detailed analysis on this intersection see chapter 4, section 4. 
261 E. Martino, Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional comparative 
analysis, cit., 17 
 184 
to be accompanied by a white paper detailing the token’s characteristics, the goal of the project, 
etc.262 The problem that has arisen is that such white papers were frequently incomplete or 
inaccurate. This has caused an explosion of crypto -projects raising stellar amounts of money and 
then failing (due to fraud or incompetence). Attracted by the, seemingly magical, earnings of early 
adopters, investors flocked to crypto-projects and invested millions in tokens that were rooted in 
dreamy white papers without, in some cases, even a line of code written. 
MiCAR addresses the problem by introducing a detailed regulation of the white paper. First of all, 
the white paper is explicitly mandatory for any issuance.263 The white paper has to include a list of 
compulsory information - information about the offeror or the person seeking admission to 
trading, information about the crypto -asset project, information regarding the underlying 
technology – and warnings – including that the crypto-assets may lose their value in part or in full. 
The aim is to ensure the white paper provides investor s with a complete picture of what they are 
buying (the white paper should be published on the issuers’ website) and to force the issuer to only 
proceed to a public offering when the project is advanced enough to be able to draft a complete 
paper. It is for this same purpose that MiCAR regulates marketing communications. 
The white paper also plays a role in facilitating the activity of supervisory authorities. Eminently, 
the white paper must be notified to the competent authority at least twenty working days before 
its publication together with a statement detailing where the token will be offered and the starting 
date of the public offer.  
While the white paper has a function of protection for the investor, MiCAR also makes its 
notification a means to streamline crypto -assets offerings in Europe. The Regulation states that 
National law cannot require any ex-ante authorization, with the notification as the only requirement 
needed to proceed to an offering. Furthermore, it prohibits Member States from imposing “any 
further information requirements, with regard to the offer of those crypto-assets or the admission of such crypto-assets 
to a trading platform for crypto-assets”.  
These prescriptions are reinforced through the introduction of civil liability in case of non -
compliance. When a white paper is not drafted in accordance with MiCAR, a “ a holder of crypto - 
 
262 D. Boreiko – G. Ferrarini – P. Giudici, Blockchain startups and prospectus regulation, cit., 669. 
263 Exclusions under art. 4, para. 2. 
 185 
assets may claim damages from those persons or bodies for damage caused to her or him due to that infringement ”, 
adding that “any contractual exclusion thereof shall be deprived of any legal effect”. 
 
3.2.2 The offer of asset-referenced tokens 
 
The offer or admission to trading of asset -referenced tokens is under a more stringent discipline 
compared to the one detailed so far.  
First of all, to offer an asset-referenced token the entity should be a legal person (with very limited 
exceptions) established in the Union and have received an ex-ante authorization by the home 
Member State – excluding smaller offers or offers only directed to qualified investors. This 
authorization is rooted in an evaluation of both the entity and the white paper. An exception to 
this double evaluation is introduced for  credit institutions which only need to submit their paper 
for approval.264 
Before proceeding to an offer, the issuer should submit an application comprising the white paper 
(which content largely overlaps with the one mentioned above) and a series of information 
regarding the issuer. With asset-referenced tokens, the evaluation of the National authority is not 
only ex-ante but also entails the entity per se (considering elements as the management body’s repute, 
the cybersecurity framework, etc.). 
After having received the application, the competent authority has twenty -five working days to 
communicate if the application is complete, sixty working days to adopt a fully reasoned draft 
decision (also based on additional information that can be request ed during this time frame), the 
draft decision should be communicated to EBA, ESMA and the ECB (or the National Central 
Bank where outside the euro-zone) that have twenty working days to send a non-binding opinion, 
within twenty-five working days from the reception of such opinion the Authority should issue a 
final decision.  
 
264 Certain requirements are dictated also for credit institutions, see art. 15a. 
 186 
Once granted, the authorization is valid for the entire Union. 
To underline how crypto -assets regulation – especially when it comes to stablecoins – mixes 
technical and political considerations, among the grounds of refusal, and authorization’s 
withdrawal, MiCAR explicitly includes (apart from the classic ones of indi vidual and corporate 
non-compliance) a negative opinion by the ECB or the National Central Bank “ on grounds of (…) 
monetary sovereignty”.  
The issuance of a parallel currency by the private sector, if diffused enough, may exclude the public 
authority from the management of the currency. While the Digital Euro265, and other Central Bank 
Digital Currencies’ projects worldwide constitute a “market answer” to this menace providing for 
a State-backed competitor to stablecoins, MiCAR delivers to the State a regulatory bulwark266. The 
demarcation of what a serious threat to monetary sovereignty is will then be up to Central Banks, 
and Courts to decide.  
Asset-referenced tokens are under more stringent requirements also in terms of governance and 
organization. Of particular relevance are those concerning the reserve of assets, due to the 
specificity of stablecoin’s business model. As mentioned, one of the methods a stablecoin can 
employ to maintain its value stable is by referring to another asset, currency, or basket thereof. 267 
When the investor buys such tokens, the issuer buys an equivalent value (or a percentage) of the 
referenced asset. This guarantees the holder against fluctuation as they can always redeem their 
tokens against the value of the underlying referenced asset.  
One of the main problems underlined in practice is a significant risk that issuers don’t buy the 
reserves promised or overvalue them 268. When a crisis hits (or any other event that triggers 
something comparable to a bank-run), the issuer is unable to honour its debts and millions, if not 
billions are lost.  
 
265 https://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/digital_euro/html/index.en.html  
266 on a similar note, art. 19b restricts asset-backed token too widely used as means-of-exchange. 
267 E. Martino, Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional comparative 
analysis, cit., 19, Financial Stability Board, Regulation, Supervision and Oversight of" Global Stablecoin" Arrangements: 
Final Report and High-Level Recommendations, 2020, 5. 
268 See the controversy regarding Tether’s backing, New York Times, The Coin that could wreck crypto , 17th 
June 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/06/17/technology/tether-stablecoin-cryptocurrency.html  
 187 
To avoid this scenario MiCAR prescribes a series of rules to guarantee the formation and 
preservation of the reserves. Such measures entail prescriptions on the insulation of funds, the 
management of the liquidity risk, the reserves’ custody, the connectio n between 
issuance/redemption and reserves, and mandatory independent audits (every six months). To 
further guarantee investors, MiCAR mandates issuers to draft a “recovery plan” to restore reserves 
and a “redemption plan” to guarantee orderly redemption of assets by holders (to be drafted within 
six months from the authorization and notified to the Supervisors). 
 
3.2.3 The issuance of e-money tokens 
 
For the issuance of e -money tokens MiCAR largely refers to the e -money Directive. 269  This 
reference encompasses the issuer (that can only be a credit or an e -money institution), the token 
(that qualifies as e-money under the meaning of the Directive) and in general the regulation of the 
token. Article 43, paragraph 1-b, explicitly makes Title IV MiCAR lex specialis with respect to the 
Directive stating: “ Title II and III of Directive 2009/110/EC shall apply with respect to e -money tokens 
unless otherwise stated in this Title of this Regulation”.  
The main additions to the Directive’s discipline are the key elements of MiCAR we have already 
underlined. First, the white paper for which a notification procedure and not an approval one is 
prescribed. In this sense, e-money tokens follow the same discipline as the first category of token 
we have analysed, with a notification twenty days prior to the publication and a prohibition to 
impose an ex-ante approval procedure. Second, reserve and redeemability. E -money tokens can 
only be issued at par with the r eserves and must guarantee immediate and free redeemability. 
MiCAR also extends to e-money tokens the duty to draft a recovery and redemption plan. 
 
3.2.4 Significant asset and e-money tokens 
 
269 Directive of the European Union, 16th September 2009, n. 110. 
 188 
 
For both asset-backed and e-money tokens, MiCAR introduces a separate category: the significant 
token. The discipline is mostly similar for the two tokens. The classification is done by the EBA, 
after a consultation procedure, based on a series of criteria (number of holders, number, and value 
of transactions, international usage, etc.). The classification can also be requested by the issuer. In 
this case, they need to prove they are likely to meet the abovementioned criteria shortly after the 
issuance. 
The classification as significant shifts the supervisory responsibilities from National authorities to 
the EBA. Due to the width of the services provided, issuers of significant tokens are also under 
additional requirements, in terms of risk management, competition, stress tests, etc. 
 
3.2.5 Crypto-assets service providers 
 
The last piece of MiCAR’s infrastructure is the regulation of CASPs.  
MiCAR introduces an authorization procedure mandatory for any CASP that provides services, 
even if remotely, in the Union’s market (safe for a series of categories of providers that are under 
a notification regime).270  
To lawfully operate CASPs must be legal persons or other undertakings and must have received 
authorization in the host Member State. The related application must contain a list of information 
detailing the CASPs governance structure, activity, management, and so on. Within forty days from 
the reception of the application, the National Authority, after having completed a number of 
controls, must adopt a reasoned decision. 
The authorization is not general, rather it only applies to one or more specific services that must 
be detailed in the application. Once obtained the authorization, the CASP is allowed to provide its 
 
270 See art. 53a MiCaR. 
 189 
services throughout the Union without the possibility for other Member States to require 
additional authorizations.  
Apart from the authorization procedure, CASPs are under very similar behavioural and 
organizational duties as issuers (honesty, transparency, prudential, and governance requirements). 
Furthermore, MiCAR introduces additional provisions for specific services – such as safekeeping, 
trading, and exchange. 
Also, concerning these entities, MiCAR  introduces the concept of significant CASPs. Meaning 
those services that have more than 15 million active users per annum. This denomination does not 
shift the supervisory duties at the Union level, as with issuers, but rather introduces a monitoring 
duty by the European Securities and Market Authority (ESMA) regarding the activity of National 
Supervisors. 
 
3.3 The AML Package 
 
As anticipated in the previous section , the relevance of the MiCaR for our analysis is essentially 
indirect. T he Regulation is not, per se, an anti -money laundering legislation. However, the 
definitions introduced by MiCaR are deemed to become the gold standard for the European 
regulation of crypto-assets irrespective of the field. 
It is to this end that the upcoming Anti -Money Laundering Package refers to both MiCaR’s 
definition of crypto -asset and Crypto -asset Service Provider when defining its scope. Therefore, 
MiCaR’s definition of CASP will, as the definition of crypto -assets, become one of the pillars of 
the future sectorial regulation.271 However, unlike the definition of crypto -assets, which has been 
translated into the Package without any modification, for the regulated entities the transposition 
has only been partial. It is, hence, necessary to briefly delve into the text of the Anti -Money 
 
271 European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document Accompanying the document Report from the 
Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of the risk of money laundering and terrorist 
financing affecting the internal market and relating to cross-border activities, cit. 
 190 
Laundering Package, and most importantly of its Regulation, to delineate up to what extent the 
MiCaR will be relevant for money laundering purposes. 
But first, let’s cursorily introduce the Anti-Money Laundering Package.  
The “Anti-Money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism legislative package” 272 is 
an ambitious proposal presented by the European Commission in July 2021. The package is the 
outcome of a reflection started in 2019 as a result of a series of high-level money laundering cases 
that rocked the European financial system.273 Following these scandals, the Commission published 
a Report274 analysing the cases and a Communication laying down the key weaknesses of the system 
that had led to the associated failures.275 This analytical work resulted in an Action Plan, published 
in May 2020, for the modernization of the Union’s Anti -Money Laundering Framework. 276 The 
Action Plan identified six pillars for the amelioration of the present system: “1) Ensuring the effective 
implementation of the existing EU AML/CFT framework; 2) Establishing an EU single rule book on 
AML/CFT; 3)Bringing about EU level AML/CFT supervision; 4)Establishing a support and cooperation 
mechanism for FIUs; 5) Enforcing Union-level criminal law provisions and information exchange; 6) Strengthening 
the international dimension of the EU AML/CFT framework” 
In line with the action plan and with a view at implementing the abovementioned pillars, the 
Commission presented, one year later, the Anti -Money Laundering Package. The Package is 
composed of four legislative instruments: the First Anti-Money Laundering Regulation, the Sixth 
Anti-Money Laundering Directive, the Regulation for the institution of a European Anti -Money 
 
272 For further information see https://finance.ec.europa.eu/publications/anti-money-laundering-and-
countering-financing-terrorism-legislative-package_en  
273 H. Koster, Towards better implementation of the European Union’s anti-money laundering and countering the financing 
of terrorism framework in Journal of Money Laundering Control, 2, 2020, 383; for an analysis of such scandals and 
the connected possible regulatory responses see A. Minto – N. Skovmand Rasmussen, Approaching the 
Danske Bank Scandal in a “Tragedy of the Commons” Perspective: Implications for Anti -Money Laundering Institutional 
Design and Regulatory Reforms in Europe, in European Company and Financial Law Review, 19/2, 2022. 
274 European Commission, Report from the Commission on the assessment of recent alleged money laundering cases 
involving EU credit institutions, (COM/2019/373 final ), 2019; H. Koster, Towards better implementation of the 
European Union’s anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism framework, cit., 380. 
275 European Commission, Communication from the Commission - Towards better implementation of the EU's anti -
money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism framework (COM/2019/360 final) , cit.; for a detailed 
analysis of such fallacies see also European Banking Authority, EBA Report on the future of AML/CFT 
Framework in the EU, cit. 
276 European Commission, Communication from the Commission on an Action Plan for a comprehensive Union policy 
on preventing money laundering and terrorist financing (C/2020/2800), OJ C 164, 2020. 
 191 
Laundering Authority, and the Regulation on the implementation of the travel rule in the field of 
crypto-assets (analysed in the following chapter).  
The main purpose of this Package is the acceleration of the harmonization, in the area of money 
laundering prevention, both in terms of legislation and enforcement.277  
From the former perspective, the Package provides for the substitution of the current Fifth Anti-
Money Laundering Directive with the First Anti -money Laundering Regulation. The crux of the 
sectorial regulation will, hence, shift to a directly applicable, uniform legislation that will guarantee 
homogeneity across the bloc.278 While the Package still provides for a Directive – the Sixth Anti-
money Laundering Directive – 279 this solely covers ancillary fields as risk calculation, cooperation 
among FIUs, etc. The core areas – as the identification of the regulated entities, reporting 
obligations, compliance duties – will all be covered by the upcoming First Regulation. This w ill 
constitute a seismic shift as it will deprive Member States of the leeway they have been granted so 
far and provide for a single rule book across the entire bloc. 
From the latter perspective, the Package introduces a new European authority tasked with 
centralized supervision: the European Anti -money Laundering Authority (AMLA). Eminently, 
one of the main shortcomings identified as the root cause of the financial scandals analysed by the 
Commission’ report  was precisely the lack of proper supervision, especially in cross -border 
 
277 See European Commission, Communication from the Commission on an Action Plan for a comprehensive Union 
policy on preventing money laundering and terrorist financing, cit., 2, “there is growing consensus that the framework needs to 
be significantly improved. Major divergences in the way it is applied and serious weaknesses in the enforcement of the rules need 
to be addressed”; see also, Proposal for a Regulation of the European Union, 20th July 2021, n. 0239, “The need 
for harmonised rules across the internal market is corroborated by the evidence provided in the 2019 reports issued by the 
Commission. These reports identified that whereas the requirements of Directive (EU) 2015/849 are far-reaching, their lack 
of direct applicability and granularity led to a fragmentation in their application along national lines and divergent 
interpretations. This situation does not allow dealing effectively with cross -border situations and are therefore ill -suited to 
adequately protect the internal market. It also generates additional costs and burdens for operators providing cross -border 
services and causes regulatory arbitrage ”; European Banking Authority, Opinion of the European Banking Authority 
on money laundering and terrorist financing risks affecting the EU’s financial sector, cit., 14. 
278 See European Commission, Communication from the Commission on an Action Plan for a comprehensive Union 
policy on preventing money laundering and terrorist financing , cit., 4, “ EU AML/CFT legislation needs to become more 
granular, more precise and less subject to diverging implementations. Certain additional requirements imposed by Member 
States when transposing AML Directives might however contribute to a stronger AML/CFT framew ork and could be 
integrated into the future EU rulebook. To limit divergences in the interpretation and application of the rules, certain parts of 
the AMLD should be turned into directly applicable provisions set out in a Regulation”. 
279 Proposal for a Directive of the European Union, 20th July 2021, n. 0250. 
 192 
operations.280 To this end, the introduction of a European Supervisor constitutes a fundamental 
step for the correct enforcement of the anti-money laundering compliance duties.  
As stated by the Commission: 
“EU’s AML/CFT framework is only as strong as its weakest link, and failings in one national competent 
authority create risks for the whole of the Single Market. The EU as a whole suffers financial, economic and 
reputational damage as a consequence”.281 
The European supervisor will not substitute but rather supplement and integrate National ones so 
to guarantee a common minimum level of enforcement across the bloc. 
To sum up, the Anti -money Laundering Package is a bundle of legislations presented by the 
Commission in 2021 and deemed to be introduced in 2024. The main purpose of the Package is 
to further harmonize the rules and their enforcement at the Union’s level.  
 
3.3.1 The Anti-money Laundering Package and Crypto-assets 
 
If the overarching goals pursued by the Package are those mentioned above, the latter also aims at 
adjourning the European legislation to the latest Guidance coming from the FATF. Specifically, 
one of the areas w here such an update is urgently needed is the regulation of crypto -assets. The 
restrictive approach taken by the Fifth Directive is no longer in line with the FATF’s standards 
post-2018 and, more in general, with the risk perception associated with the crypto-market.  
As stated by recital 11 of the Anti-money Laundering Regulation: 
“Directive (EU) 2018/843 was the first legal instrument to address the risks of money laundering and terrorist 
financing posed by crypto-assets in the Union (…) Due to rapid technological developments and the advancement 
 
280 European Commission, Communication from the Commission on an Action Plan for a comprehensive Union policy 
on preventing money laundering and terrorist financing, cit., 6. 
281 See European Commission, Communication from the Commission on an Action Plan for a comprehensive Union 
policy on preventing money laundering and terrorist financing, cit., 6. 
 193 
in FATF standards, it is necessary to review this approach. A first step to complete and update the Union legal 
framework has been achieved with Regulation (MiCaR), which set requirements for crypto-asset service providers 
wishing to apply for an authorisation to provide their services in the single market. It also introduced a definition 
of crypto-assets and crypto-assets services providers encompassing a broader range of activities. Crypto- asset service 
providers covered by Regulation (MiCaR) should also be covered by this Regulation, to mitigate any risk of misuse 
of crypto-assets for money laundering or terrorist financing purposes”. 
When it comes to crypto-assets regulation, the key piece of legislation is the Regulation. Eminently, 
it is the Regulation that identifies the list of covered entities and, hence, is the main locus of the 
present analysis regarding covered entities.  
Specifically, the Regulation, at article 3, paragraph 3, letter g ), includes Crypto -assets Service 
Providers among the regulated entities, eliminating the previous references to the two distinct 
categories of exchangers and wallet providers. Article 2, paragraph 14, then, defines Crypto-asset 
Service Provider as “a crypto-assets service provider as defined in Article 3(1), point (8) of Regulation (MiCaR) 
where performing one or more crypto -asset services as defined in Article 3(1) point (9) of that Regulation ”. The 
definition is, hence, completely symmetrical to the one provided by MiCaR.  
There is, however, a key difference in terms of regulated entities between MiCaR and the 
Regulation. The latter, nor any other legislations of the Anti-money Laundering Package, does not 
refer to two categories of covered entities under MiCaR: offerors and issuers. As mentioned above, 
these two categories do not fall under the umbrella of Crypto -assets Service Providers . Rather, 
they are separate regulated entities. The lack of any reference to them means their exclusion from 
the anti-money laundering regulatory purview.  
This does not mean that any and all activities connected with the issuance of crypto -assets are 
outside the anti -money laundering purview. As underlined in section three-one-five, there are 
several activities connected with token offerings – marketing, reception and, placing of orders – 
that do qualify as Crypto-assets Services under MiCaR. However, the mere act of issuing a token 
will not fall under the umbrella of the Bloc’s compliance duties. The choice of excluding issuers 
is, after all, in line with th e FATF’s Guidance of 2021. As we saw, also following that Guidance, 
solely the activities facilitating an issuance fall under the umbrella of the Regulation and not the 
issuance per se.  
 194 
If issuers are certainly excluded from the anti-money laundering purview, the same does not apply 
to offerors. Eminently, the category of offerors is introduced by MiCaR as an overarching one that 
supersedes the micro-categories of CASPs. However, even if offerors are excluded from the Anti-
money Laundering Regulation, most of the actions they will have to execute to carry out an offer 
will qualify as covered activities . Eminently, in line with the FATF’s take on the matter, the 
Regulation excludes only the mere issuance not accompanied by  any subsequent commercial 
activity. In contrast, an issuance that resolves in commercial activities – as marketing, placing, and 
taking of orders – will qualify as a covered activity.  
Between regulated and unregulated entities there is, hence, a fine line. To fall outside the regulatory 
corral the issuer needs to abstain from any form of subsequent commercial activity.282 Such an 
exclusion seems reasonable if an intermediary -centred approach is taken: mere issuers do not 
intermediate exchanges of value, hence, are not intermediaries. Rather, issuers are software 
developers who create and launch a network/token without retaining control over the latter. 
However, if we look beyond the traditional approach, the role of issuers could be valorised in a 
different light. As designers of autonomous systems which generate relevant finan cial risks, pre-
launch, design duties could be customized to them. Hence, while with issuers a mere extension of 
the pre -existing duties may be inappropriate, new and customized duties may be devised to 
guarantee ex-post compliance. In sum, the regulator correctly excludes issuers from applying 
controls envisioned for intermediaries. However, such an exclusion should not be complete. 
Different and customized duties should be provided for issuers taking into account their role as 
designers of autonomous software. The structure of such duties is the object of chapter five which 
reflects on how such an ex-ante regulation could be devised.283 
The Anti-money Laundering Package is the last piece in our legislative journey. Throughout this 
Part, we have outlined how the  legislator has identified new intermediaries in the, seemingly 
disintermediated, crypto-asset market. Now that the object and subjects of the sectorial regulation 
have been identified, it is time to critically evaluate its content. After a brief conclusion in the next 
 
282 For further reflections concerning this distinction between issuer and offeror see section 3 of the present 
chapter. 
283 See section 2.4 of the present chapter and section 3 of chapter 5. A much stricter exemption is applied 
in the US by the FinCEN, Application of FinCEN’s Regulations to Certain Business Models Involving Convertible 
Virtual Currencies, cit. 
 195 
Part, the following  chapter will do exactly that by delving  into the content of the anti-money 
laundering duties and how these adapted to crypto-assets. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 196 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 197 
Part Three 
 
Final Remarks 
 
 
The present chapter has analysed how the legislature has framed the object and the subjects of the 
anti-money laundering regulation in the crypto -assets arena. We have seen how the strategy, the 
definitions, and the underlying principles have changed during the last decade.  
The path has started, back in 2014, with a currency-centric, general definition of crypto-asset and 
a single regulated entity  – i.e., exchangers; we now have a technology -specific definition and a 
multitude of covered entities encompassing nearly any centralized activity carried out in the crypto-
space. Having abandoned the idea of simply containing, fencing the market, the regulator has 
adopted an increasingly hands -on approach. New categories have been introduced, and crypto -
assets have been gradually assimilated to traditional financial instruments.284  
The fil rouge of this legislative path is the quest for customization. As the market evolved, the 
legislator has been faced with the need to provide for increasingly detailed duties customized to 
the market. At the same time, such customization seems to have lacked a true capacity of going 
beyond the traditional regulatory strategy.  
In terms of definition, the legislator seems to have missed the key differentiating characteristics of 
crypto-assets and blockchain technology: the disintermediation of digital interactions. It is in 
disintermediation that the crux of the crypto -risk dwells. The provision of an all -encompassing 
definition that equates centralized and decentralized tokens constitutes a missed opportunity for 
 
284 E. Martino, Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional comparative 
analysis, cit., 13. 
 198 
concrete customization. The MiCaR’s abandonment of a purist vision of technological neutrality 
is certainly a welcomed innovation. However, if the intentions were good, the execution fell short.  
There is, nonetheless, still time to steady the boat. The upcoming introduction of the Anti-money 
Laundering Package provides an opportunity to adjust the overarching definition and customize it 
to the concrete risk generated by crypto -assets. Through the introduction of the two proposed 
sub-definitions of centralized and decentralized token, the Package can safeguard the overarching 
definition while laying the foundations for a tailored, risk-based approach.285 
In terms of covered entities’ identification, the legislator has also maintained a traditional approach. 
An approach that focuses on centralized intermediaries and traditional compliance duties. This 
strategy is only partially valid: the crypto-assets market has known a certain degree of centralization, 
and it is only fair such intermediaries are under similar anti -money laundering duties as other 
traditional centralized intermediaries.286 At the same time, intermediary-centred regulations ignore 
the hard questions. The regulation of decentralized organizations and networks, the role of 
software developers, and compliance-by-design, the treatment of blockchain information are all 
themes that have been dodged by the current policy framework.  
These themes have not, however, been overlooked because of ignorance. As demonstrated by the 
discussion during MiCaR’s legislative process regarding the qualification and regulation of 
decentralized autonomous organizations, the regulator is acutely aware of these issues. However, 
it has so far preferred not to address them directly.  
The overarching critique that can be moved is, hence, that the legislator has lacked the political 
will and creativity to overcome its previous approach  and devise innovative solutions . The 
intermediary-centred strategy has simply been extended from traditional finance to crypto -assets. 
If this approach is partially correct when it comes to the centralized -side of crypto-assets, it does 
not hold for its most innovative elements: decentralized and disintermediated organizations and 
transactions.  
 
285 See Chapter 3 Part 1 Section 3. 
286 See the comparison between the business model of crypto -lenders, stablecoins issuers and traditional 
banks of G. Gorton – J. Zhang, Bank Runs During Crypto Winter , cit., which advocate for a same activity 
same regulation approach. 
 199 
Blockchain modifies the architectural postulates underlying digital transactions on which the anti-
money laundering strategy has been built upon. The legislator cannot just ignore such a paradigm 
shift. As detailed in the following two chapters, there are initial signs that this approach is slowly 
changing as the criminal risk connected with decentralized arrangements and disintermediated 
transactions is forcing the hand of supervisory and enforcement authorities. 287 However, an 
overarching regulatory framework is needed to guarantee that enforcement does not thwart 
individual freedoms and foster legal uncertainty. Such a regulatory framework cannot but start 
from the delineation of clear definitions that create distinct legal categories and distinguish between 
classes that present different risks. 
 
287 See chapter 4 concerning the use of blockchain analytics tools and chapter 5, in particular, the discussion 
concerning the Tornado Cash case.  
 200 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 201 
Chapter Four 
 
The Anti-money laundering compliance duties 
Same old, same old? 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The previous chapter has analysed the object and the subjects of the regulation. The present 
chapter will delve into its content. To this end, it will analyse the anti-money laundering compliance 
duties with a special focus on crypto-assets’ regulation.  
So far we have outlined how the legislator, at the FATF and Union level, has framed the categories 
of crypto-assets and crypto-asset service provider (CASP). The present chapter will delve into how, 
and up to what extent, the concrete anti -money laundering compliance duties have been applied 
and adapted to the two above -outlined categories. It will also delve into how blockchain has 
partially modified the way supervised and supervisors approach compliance. It will examine how 
the transparency of the blockch ain ledger has prompted the development of analytics tools that 
allow a much deeper analysis of the customer and the transaction patterns compared to traditional 
monitoring infrastructures.  
The chapter is structured as follows. The second section will delve into the fundamentals of the 
anti-money laundering legislation. It will offer an overview of what money laundering compliance 
duties consist of. The third section will analyse how such duties have been extended to the crypto-
assets market from a legislative and regulatory perspective. The fifth section will analyse the 
registration duty imposed on crypto -assets service providers and its coordination with the 
 202 
upcoming regime introduced by the MiCa Regulation. The sixth section will delve into the 
upcoming European Travel Rule Regulation. 1 The seventh section will focus on blockchain 
analytics tools to explore their impact on the implementation of compliance duties and on the 
overall infrastructure of financial supervision.  
 
2. The Anti-money Laundering Compliance Duties. A recap 
 
The first source for the analysis of anti -money laundering compliance duties are the Forty 
Recommendations2 published by the Financial Action Task Force. The Recommendations (also 
known as FATF Standard) are the backbone of the sectorial regulation as they lay down the 
minimum common standards to be applied in any industry and by any type of covered entity.3 The 
Recommendations are, then, integrated by a set of Guidances published for specific industries or 
type of regulated entity to customize the overarching policy strategy (as the above -analysed 
Guidance on virtual assets and virtual asset service providers).  
The Standard was first approved by the FATF in 1990. After a series of modifications, the last 
comprehensive version has been published in 2012 and has since been regularly updated. The 
Standard is composed of forty high level Recommendations divided in seven areas: 1) AML/CFT 
Policies and coordination; 2) Money laundering and confiscation; 3) Terrorist financing and 
financing of proliferation; 4) Preventive measures; 5) Transparency and beneficial ownership of  
legal persons and arrangements; 6) Powers and responsibilities of competent authorities and other 
institutional measures; 7) International cooperation. Due to the international scope of the FATF’s 
 
1 Proposal for a Regulation of the European Union, 20th July 2021, n. 0241.  
2 Financial Action Task Force, International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the Finance of Terrorism 
and Proliferation. The FATF Recommendations, cit., for further information and related publications see 
https://www.fatf-gafi.org/en/topics/fatf-recommendations.html; on their relevance P. Van Duyne – J. H. 
Harvey – L. Y. Gelemerova, The critical handbook of money laundering: Policy, analysis and myths, cit., 125 – 126. 
3 V. Mitsilegas – N. Vavoula, The evolving EU anti-money laundering regime: challenges for fundamental rights and the 
rule of law, cit., 264; M. Campbell-Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global anti -money laundering governance, cit., 
293. 
 203 
mandate, the Recommendations are thought as a flexible instrument to be adapted by each 
jurisdiction depending on the characteristics of their legal system.4 
At the Union level, the backbone of the compliance regulation is constituted by the Money 
Laundering Directives. These Directives have been in force since 1990, in parallel with the FATF’s 
Standard, and have been progressively enriched during the last three decades. The latest Directive 
is the Fifth, approved in 2018, which also constitutes the first anti -money laundering Directive 
encompassing crypto-assets.5 The core of the policy strategy as laid out by the Directives is then 
complemented at the Union and National level. At the Union level, by specific Regulations and 
executive acts of the Commission and the European Supervisory Authorities, specifically the  
European Banking Authority. An example being the Travel Rule Regulation, implementing 
FATF’s Recommendation 16, analysed in section five of the present chapter. At the National level, 
by legislations implementing the Directives and guidelines published by each Financial Intelligence 
Unit.  
As detailed in the previous chapter, the sectorial regulation is currently undergoing a major 
upheaval at the Union Level through the introduction, envisioned for the late 2024, of the Anti -
money Laundering Package. The Package will partially replace the c urrent Directive with a 
Regulation. For the purpose of our present analysis, we can take the Directive and the Standard as 
our point of reference. Eminently, the aim here is to highlight the key elements of anti -money 
laundering compliance to facilitate th e readers’ understanding of the customized regulation 
provided for crypto -assets. These core concepts are not fundamentally affected by the 
aforementioned legislative project.  
 
 
4 See among the fundamental principle of FATF’s policies, the Functional equivalence and objectives-based 
approach which means “the FATF requirements, including as they apply in the VA space, are compatible with a variety 
of different legal and administrative systems. They broadly explain what must be done but not in an overly -specific manner 
about how implementation should occur i n order to allow for different options, where appropriate. Any clarifications to the 
requirements should not require jurisdictions that have already adopted adequate measures to achieve the objectives of the 
FATF Recommendations to change the form of their  laws and regulations. The Guidance seeks to support ends -based or 
objectives-based implementation of the relevant FATF Recommendations rather than impose a rigid prescriptive one-size-fits-
all regulatory regime across all jurisdictions ”, in Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk -based approach. 
Virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, cit., 9. 
5 For an analysis see the previous Chapter. 
 204 
2.1 The Risk-based Approach 
 
The overarching principle governing the anti -money laundering field, provided by 
Recommendation 1 of the FATF Standard, is the risk -based approach.6 The risk-based approach 
applies equally to legislators, supervisors, and covered entities.7 This principle aims at avoiding that 
compliance duties are applied in a mechanical fashion (causing the, so-called, tick boxing fallacy).8 
Due to the multifaceted and adaptive nature of money laundering, both supervisors and supervised 
should tailor compliance duties to the specific nature of the risk identified for each specific case. 9 
In this sense, the anti -money laundering legislation is envisioned as a flexible instrument to be 
customized to each single situation depending on the risks identified. Covered entities are, hence, 
required to put an extra effort and assess the risk at ha nd and then decide how to apply the 
regulation.10 
 
6 The risk -based approach constitutes the second iteration of the anti -money laundering regulation, 
eminently, in the beginning the regulation was focused on a rule-based approach. However, following critics 
that such an approach was costly and created rules easy to circumvent for money launderers, the rule-based 
approach was substituted, starting from 2003, with the current risk -based approach. Eminently, money 
launderers have proven adaptive and reactive to regulatory standard, thus, making a stable, rule -based 
approach too predictable. For an analysis see A. Bello – J. Harvey, From a risk -based to an uncertainty -based 
approach to anti-money laundering compliance, in Security Journal, 30, 2017, 25-27. 
7 E. Savona - M. Riccardi, Assessing the risk of money laundering: research challenges and implications for practitioners , 
in European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research , 25, 2019, 1; P. Van Duyne – J. H. Harvey – L. Y. 
Gelemerova, The critical handbook of money laundering: Policy, analysis and myths, cit., 127. 
8 For tick boxing fallacy it is meant the implementation of anti-money laundering controls in an automatic, 
mindless function. From this perspective, anti -money laundering duties are simply another box to tick to 
open an account which in turn significantly decreases the concrete effectiveness of the controls. See, A. 
Bello – J. Harvey, From a risk-based to an uncertainty-based approach to anti-money laundering compliance, cit., 26; S. 
Ross – M. Hannan, Money laundering regulation and risk-based decision-making, cit., 107. 
9 See Financial Action Task Force, International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the Finance of 
Terrorism and Proliferation. The FATF Recommendations, cit., 30, “ By adopting a risk -based approach, competent 
authorities, financial institutions and DNFBPs should be able to ensure that measures to prevent or mitigate money laundering 
and terrorist financing are commensurate with the risks identified, and would enable them to make decisions on how to allocate 
their own resources in the most effective way ”; for the application of the risk based approach in supervision see 
Directive of the European Union, 20 th May 2015, n. 849 (consolidated version updated to the 30 th June 
2021) article 48, paragraph 6, and for covered entities article 8. See also L. Dalla Pellegrina – D. 
Masciandaro, The risk-based approach in the new European anti-money laundering legislation: a law and economics view , 
cit., 936, “Since money launderers can have a complete knowledge of an AML regulation with such an approach, they 
therefore can adjust their money laundering techniques in order to comply with the codified rules, consequently making illega l 
operations indistinguishable from legal ones. At the end of the day, FIs will identify all transactions as regular ones”. 
10 See Directive of the European Union, 20 th May 2015, n. 849, recital 22, “ The risk of money laundering and 
terrorist financing is not the same in every case. Accordingly, a holistic, risk -based approach should be used. The risk -based 
approach is not an unduly permissive option for Member States and obliged entities. It involves the use of evidence -based 
 205 
There are three main dimensions of the anti-money laundering risk.  
First, the overarching risk, to be identified at a policy/supervisory level. At this level, the object of 
the analysis concerns industries and categories of transactions.11 Second, the risk, to be identified 
by the single covered entities, regarding the different areas (industry and geographical) where the 
entities operate and each macro-process. Third, the individual risk, to be identified by the covered 
entity and its compliance team. At this level, the focus is on the single customer and/or transaction 
depending on its specific characteristics.  
The first and second risk factors should guide both supervisors and supervised in the allocation of 
resources12 and in drafting tailored policies. 13 The second and third risk factors should guide the 
covered entity in customizing the level of controls to be applied in each specific case.14 Eminently, 
the regulation requires covered entities to draft a risk profile for each customer on which basis all 
further compliance decisions should be made. 15 For instance, a customer operating in a high -risk 
industry (as diamonds, gold trading, weapons, or crypto -assets) or high risk country16 as well as a 
high-risk individual (as a Politically Exposed Persons) 17 should warrant for increased controls – 
 
decision-making in order to target the risks of money laundering and terrorist financing facing the Union and those operating 
within it more effectively”. 
11 At the Union’s level the National risk assessment is complemented by a Union level risk assessment that 
is published on a biannual basis jointly by the European Supervisory Authorities (EBA and ESMA) as 
provided by article 6, paragraph five, of Directive of the European Union, 20 th May 2015, n. 849, cit.; E. 
Savona - M. Riccardi, Assessing the risk of money laundering: research challenges and implications for practitioner, cit., 2. 
12 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk based approach to virtual assets and virtual asset service providers , 
cit., 34. 
13 S. Ross – M. Hannan, Money laundering regulation and risk-based decision-making, in Journal of Money Laundering 
Control, 1, 2007, 106; A. Simonova, The risk‐based approach to anti ‐money laundering: problems and solutions  in 
Journal of Money Laundering Control , 4, 2011, 347; for an example of such policies see European Banking 
Authority, Guidelines on customer due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions should consider when assessing 
the money laundering and terrorist financing risk associated with individual business relationships and occasional transactions 
(‘The ML/TF Risk Factors Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/849, Paris, 2021. 
14 European Banking Authority, Guidelines on customer due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions 
should consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist financing risk associated with individual business 
relationships and occasional transactions (‘The ML/TF Risk Factors Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive 
(EU) 2015/849), cit., 20; O. Tucker, The flow of illicit funds. A case study approach to anti-money laundering compliance, 
cit., 28. 
15 These decisions include whether to pursue Enhanced Due Diligence controls, the frequency of ongoing 
due diligence, the threshold and frequency of transaction monitoring. 
16 High risk countries are identified, following art. 9 of the Anti-money Laundering  Directive, by the 
Commission annually such an exercise and its effects are regulated by European Commission Delegated 
Regulation, 14th July 2016, n. 1675. 
17 The category of Politically Exposed Person is one of particular relevance for anti -money laundering 
purposes. Eminently, due to their position these individuals are considered of higher risks as they could be 
involved in corruption or other instances of p ublic funds’ mismanagement. For this reason, Politically 
 206 
so-called Enhanced Due Diligence.18 At the same time, if risks are low, simplified controls can be 
applied.19 
The risk-based approach, hence, introduces a preliminary duty on both supervisor and supervised 
to pursue a risk assessment at each of the three levels identified. 20 This exercise is thought as a 
collaborative effort between supervisors and supervised. Eminently, it is up to the supervisors to 
provide covered entities with information and guidance to shape their risk assessment. 21 In this 
sense, covered entities have a bounded discretion when evaluating risk. The supervisor sets the 
boundaries and identifies the key risks, tracing a common minimum standard. It is, then, up to the 
supervised to evaluate, within these boundaries, the risk a single customer, process, or transaction 
poses. 
 
Exposed Persons are under tighter controls for anti-money laundering purposes and are considered as high 
risk customer. A Politically Exposed Persons are defined by article 3, para. 9, of the Directive of the 
European Union, 20th May 2015, n. 849 as “a natural person who is or who has been entrusted with prominent public 
functions and includes the following: (a) heads of State, heads of government, ministers and deputy or assistant ministers; ( b) 
members of parliament or of similar legislative bodies; (c) members of the governing bodies of political parties; (d) members of 
supreme courts, of constitutional courts or of other high -level judicial bodies, the decisions of which are not subject to further 
appeal, except in exceptional circumstances; (e) members of courts of auditors or of the boards of central banks; (f) ambassadors, 
chargés d'affaires and high-ranking officers in the armed forces; (g) members of the administrative, management or supervisory 
bodies of State -owned enterprises; (h) directors, deputy directors and members of the board or equivalent function of an 
international organization”. For a critique A. Bello – J. Harvey, From a risk-based to an uncertainty-based approach to 
anti-money laundering compliance, cit., 30, that argue such automatic risk factors constitute a surreptitious 
reintroduction of the box-ticking approach. 
18 O. Tucker, The flow of illicit funds. A case study approach to anti-money laundering compliance, cit., 13. 
19For some examples of elements that covered entities should take into account when evaluating a 
customers’ risk see Financial Action Task Force, International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the 
Finance of Terrorism and Proliferation. The FATF Recommendations, cit., 68. Examples of risk factors are: business 
that are cash intensive; countries subject to sanctions, embargoes, or similar measures issued by, for 
example, the United Nations; on -face-to-face business relationships or transactions. Mitigating factors 
include: the customer being a public company listed on a stock exchange or a public administration; or the 
provision of services as life insurance policies where the premium is low ( e.g., an annual premium of less 
than USD/EUR 1,000 or a single premium of less than USD/EUR 2,500).  
20 M. Campbell-Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global anti-money laundering governance, cit., 293. 
21 As provided by article 7, para 4, letter e, of the Directive Member States shall “make appropriate information 
available promptly to obliged entities to facilitate the carrying out of their own money laundering and terrorist financing r isk 
assessments”. For a list of such sources see Guidelines 1.30, European Banking Authority, Guidelines on customer 
due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions should consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist 
financing risk associated with individual business relationships and occasional transactions (‘The ML/T F Risk Factors 
Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/849), cit., 25. 
 207 
This exercise is a fundamental part of compliance in the field and one that is also key in the ex-post 
evaluation regarding the effectiveness of an anti -money laundering framework. 22 The risk 
assessment should, hence, be duly documented and updated.  
Furthermore, the risk assessment is conceived as a dynamic rather than static exercise. This means 
that, both supervisors and supervised, should reassess their risk periodically and ensure is kept up 
to date. Regarding what periodically means, European law  only identifies a clear deadline for the 
risk assessment pursued by the Commission – i.e., every two years.23 National Authorities have a 
leeway in deciding when the risk assessment should be updated.24 
One element that has to be kept in mind when analysing risk assessments and risk indicators is 
their connection with costs. Eminently, the risk-based approach has a direct impact on compliance 
costs. As compliance duties change depending on the nature of the customer, certain customers 
(due to their employment status, industry, or geographical location) are significantly more costly 
for covered entities than others. This is because such customers require  more incisive controls 
and, hence, a larger allocation of resources. For instance, to open an account to a customer 
operating or located in a high-risk jurisdiction, the covered entity has to apply enhanced due 
diligence controls which are more resource and time intensive compared to normal controls. 
Such a cost variance has caused a phenomenon known as de -risking.25 With de-risking is meant 
the business choice made by covered entities not to provide services to certain customers or 
 
22 S. Ross – M. Hannan, Money laundering regulation and risk -based decision-making, cit., 107. In favour of this 
approach, L. dalla Pellegrina – G. Di Maio – D. Masciandaro – M. Saraceno, Are Bankers “Crying Wolf”? 
Type I, Type II Errors and Deterrence in Anti-Money Laundering: The Italian Case  in Italian Economic Journal, 2022, 
22, critical, A. Bello – J. Harvey, From a risk -based to an uncertainty -based approach to anti -money laundering 
compliance, cit. 
23 Article 6, paragraph 1, of the Anti -money Laundering Directive. For the latest risk assessment see 
European Commission, Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of 
the risk of money laundering and terrorist financing affecting the internal market and relating to cross -border activities, 
COM(2022), 27th October 2022.  
24 Regarding the company wide risk assessment, the EBA Guidelines 1.7 states that the company-wide risk 
assessment should set a date for each year when the risk assessment is updated, see European Banking 
Authority, Guidelines on customer due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions should consider when assessing 
the money laundering and terrorist financing risk associated with individual business relationships and occasional transactions 
(‘The ML/TF Risk Factors Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/849), cit., 21. In general 
see Guideline 1.6 – 1.10. 
25 T. Durner – L. Shetret, Understanding bank de -risking and its effects on financial inclusion: an exploratory study , 
Global Center on Cooperative Security Oxfam International, 2015. For the European response to the 
phenomenon, European Banking Authority, EBA issues Guidelines to challenge unwarranted de -risking and 
safeguard access to financial services to vulnerable customers, Paris, 31 March 2023, https://www.eba.europa.eu/eba-
issues-guidelines-challenge-unwarranted-de-risking-and-safeguard-access-financial-services. 
 208 
industries based on the connected compliance costs (and risks). This is a pathology of the system 
as it restricts access to fundamental services (as banks) to law -abiding customers simply due to 
their characteristics.26 
Compliance costs and de-risking are topics of particular relevance for our field of study. Eminently, 
the crypto-assets industry has been consistently identified, at least at the European level, as high -
risk.27 Which means the concrete implementation of duties is significantly enhanced compared to 
the overall framework. 28 In this sense, when assessing anti -money laundering regulation, it is 
important to see the imposition of increased compliance duties, even if simply in the form of a 
higher risk status, also from the perspective of compliance costs.29 
 
2.2 Profiling and Monitoring. The Customer Due Diligence 
 
26 As underlined by the EBA “ The EBA found that de -risking occurs across the EU and affects different types of 
customers or potential customers of institutions, including specific segments of the financial sector such as respondent bank s, 
payment institutions (PIs) and electronic money institutions (EMIs), as well as certain categories of individuals or entities that 
can be associated with higher ML/TF risks, for example asylum seekers from high ML/TF risk jurisdictions or not -for-
profit organisations (NPOs). While the impact and scale of de-risking within different categories of customers vary, de-risking 
can lead to adverse economic outcomes or amount to financial exclusion. Financial exclusion is of concern, as access to at least 
basic financial products and services is a prerequisit e for participation in modern economic and social life ”, see European 
Banking Authority, Opinion of the European Banking Authority on ‘de -risking’, Paris, 2022, 2; for an example of 
the real world effects of such a phenomenon see the reported impossibility for African diplomats to open 
bank accounts in Brussels as reported by Politico, see B. Moens – E. Wax, African diplomats can’t open bank 
accounts in Brussels — and Qatar scandal could make things tougher, Politico, 22 nd December 2022, 
https://www.politico.eu/article/african-diplomats-cant-open-bank-accounts-in-brussels-and-qatar-
scandal-could-make-things-tougher/  
27 European Banking Authority, Opinion of the European Banking Authority on money laundering and terrorist 
financing risks affecting the EU’s financial sector, cit., 94. 
28 See European Banking Authority, Guidelines on customer due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions 
should consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist financing risk associated with individual business 
relationships and occasional transactions (‘The ML/TF Risk Factors Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive 
(EU) 2015/849), cit., 73-74, that prohibits to covered entities, when dealing with customers that operate in 
the crypto-assets’ space, to apply simplified due diligence measures and provides for a detailed list of 
controls that should be pursued in cases as such, the gu ideline is complemented, at page 195, where the 
Authority clearly states that “ Guidelines 9.20 to 9.24 reasonably reflect the increased ML/TF risk (of virtual 
currencies)”; European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document Accompanying the document Report from 
the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of the risk of money laundering and terrorist 
financing affecting the internal market and relating to cross -border activities,  SWD(2022), cit., 101, that identifies the 
crypto-market as posing a very significant very high risk (the highest level) of money laundering.  
29 On the economic impact of such a perception see M. Campbell -Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global 
anti-money laundering governance, cit., 289; for an example see the Section Four of the present Chapter on the 
implementation of the travel rule in the crypto-sphere. 
 209 
 
The performance of Customer Due Diligence (CDD) constitutes the main duty for covered 
entities under the anti-money laundering regulation.  
Following article 11 of the Directive, Customer Due Diligence should be carried out by covered 
entities in four situations.30  
First, when establishing a business relationship. Second, when carrying out an occasional 
transaction that: (i) amounts to euro fifteen thousand or more, whether that transaction is carried 
out in a single operation or in several operations that appear to be linked; or (ii) a wire transfer 
exceeding euros one thousand.31 Third, when there is a suspicion of money laundering or terrorist 
financing. Fourth, when there are doubts about the veracity or adequacy of previously obtained 
customer identification data.32 
When one of these four conditions is met, the covered institution will have to perform a number 
of checks – which fall under the umbrella of Customer Due Diligence. These are provided by 
article 13 of the Directive.  
These measures comprise four fundamental steps. The first three steps fall under the umbrella of 
the so-called Know Your Customer (KYC). Know Your Customer refers to the activity covered 
entities have to perform in order to gain a complete understanding of  who their customer is and 
the purpose of their business relationship. Following the risk -based approach, the level of detail 
 
30 The FATF Recommendations set a lower bar compared with the Directive: following Recommendation 
10, CDD shall be triggered only “If, during the establishment or course of the customer relationship, or when conducting 
occasional transactions, a financial institution suspects that transactions relate to money laundering or terrorist financing”, see 
Financial Action Task Force, International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the Finance of Terrorism 
and Proliferation. The FATF Recommendations,  cit., 64. In this sense, the Union’s legislation requires covered 
institutions to acquire all relevant information irrespective of any suspicion, whereas for the FATF it is the 
suspicion that triggers CDD. This discrepancy does not constitute a violation of the FATF’s Standards 
which are to be interpreted as the minimum any legislation should require with always the possibility for 
individual jurisdictions to impose higher standards.  
31 A wire transfer is defined by Regulation of the European Union, 20 th May 2015, n. 847, article 3, 
paragraph 9, “any transaction at least partially carried out by electronic means on behalf of a payer through a payment service 
provider, with a view to making funds available to a payee through a payment service provider, irrespective of whether the payer 
and the payee are the same person and irrespective of whether the payment service provider of the payer and that of the payee 
are one and the same”. For more details regarding this Regulation and connected definitions refer to paragraph 
5 of this chapter delving into the travel rule.  
32 Specific thresholds are provided by letter c and d of the same article for “persons trading goods” (ten 
thousand euros) and gambling service providers (two thousand euros). 
 210 
of this profiling exercise is dependent on the risk profile as assessed based on the customer’s 
characteristics (location of the customer, complexity of its legal structure, etc.) and the purpose of 
the relation. As abovementioned, if the customer is deemed as high-risk, Enhanced Due Diligence 
controls should be applied, to obtain a more in-depth understanding of the customer.33 
The Know Your Customer process entails, at a minimum three steps directly mandated by the 
Directive.  
First, identifying the customer and verifying the customer’s identity. The extent of such a 
verification duty changes if the customer is a natural or legal person.34 
In order to understand these two steps, there is a distinction we need to draw between 
identification and verification. These two terms have a specific meaning in the anti -money 
laundering domain, one that applies to all sectorial compliance checks. It is,  hence, important to 
keep this distinction in mind when interpreting any anti-money laundering regulation. To ‘identify’ 
means to obtain certain information (identity, source of income, address, etc.) from the customer 
themselves. In contrast, ‘verifying’ means to check the former information on “the basis of documents, 
data or information obtained from a reliable and independent source ”.35 The verification constitutes, thus, a 
step further compared with the identification; one that sizably increases the compliance effort, and 
costs, required.36  
Under the first step, the covered entity has, hence, to both identify  and verify the customer’s 
identity. This entails, if the customer is a natural person, ascertaining the customer’s name, physical 
 
33 See Financial Action Task Force, International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the Finance of 
Terrorism and Proliferation. The FATF Recommendations,  cit., 74, which includes among such additional 
information: “Obtaining additional information on the customer (e.g. occupation, volume of assets, information available 
through public databases, internet, etc.), and updating more regularly the identification data of customer and beneficial own er; 
Obtaining additional information on the intended nature of the business relationship; Obtaining information on the source of 
funds or source of wealth of the customer; Obtaining information on the reasons for intended or performed transactions ”, see, 
on a similar note, Directive of the European Union, 20th May 2015, n. 849, article 18a.; H. Koster, Towards 
better implementation of the European Union’s anti -money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism framework, 
cit., 381. 
34 For further information on the different controls to be applied see Financial Action Task Force, 
International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the Finance of Terrorism and Proliferation. The FATF 
Recommendations, cit., 64 – 65. 
35 See article 13, Directive of the European Union, 20th May 2015, n. 849. 
36 On acceptable proof of identity see European Banking Authority, Guidelines on customer due diligence and the 
factors credit and financial institutions should consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist financing risk 
associated with individual business relationships and occasional transactions (‘The ML/TF Risk Factors Guidelines’) under 
Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/849, cit., 43. 
 211 
address, date of birth , and unique national identifier 37 and then verify ing it through documents 
provided by reliable third parties (e.g., in person verification by an employee of the covered entity; 
verification through a certified identification software,38 etc.). If the customer is a legal person, the 
identification covers the incorporation, registered name, and place of business. The verification 
can be carried out through the comparison between information provided by the client and third-
party repositories, such as company houses. 
The second step of Know Your Customer is mainly addressed to customers that are legal 
arrangements or legal persons.39 Eminently, article 13 requires covered entities to: 
“identify the beneficial owner and take reasonable measures to verify that person's identity so that the obliged entity 
is satisfied that it knows who the beneficial owner is, including, as regards legal persons, trusts, companies, 
foundations and similar legal arrangements, taking reasonable measures to understand the ownership and control 
structure of the customer”. 
The concept of beneficial ownership is a fundamental one for anti -money laundering purposes 
and deserves a brief digression. 
 The ultimate purpose of money laundering is to disguise the origin of  the proceeds of a crime in 
a way that gives the impression of lawfulness. 40 This is a crucial step of money laundering. The 
phase identified in the introduction under the label “layering”. Through layering criminals 
introduce a series of layers between the proceeds and the original criminal activity. The final 
purpose of money laundering is to introduce so many layers between the asset and its origin that 
 
37 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk based approach to virtual assets and virtual asset service providers , 
cit., 41; Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual 
Asset Service Providers, cit., 79. 
38 Certified identification software are software that allow the verification of the identity usually based on a 
three step process where a photo of the ID is taken, then a photo of the customer which are then compared 
(usually through face recognition proce sses) to guarantee consistency, for an example see Jumio 
https://www.jumio.com/. For guidelines on their use see Guidelines 4.32 – 4.37, European Banking 
Authority, Guidelines on customer due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions should consider when assessing 
the money laundering and terrorist financing risk associated with individual business relationships and occasional transactions 
(‘The ML/TF Risk Factors Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/849), cit., 21. 
39 Even though the concept of Beneficial Owner can also apply in case a natural person is acting on behalf 
of a third party. 
40 O. Tucker, The flow of illicit funds. A case study approach to anti-money laundering compliance, cit., 13; for more on 
money laundering and its different phases see the introduction. 
 212 
tracing back the asset to its initial source is impossible or, at least, very complex. 41 In order to 
introduce these hiding layers in an effective way , criminals have to disguise the identity of the 
people operating with the assets. To do so, money launderers use complex legal structures that 
distance the identities of the real beneficiaries from the assets, so that the covered entity does not 
perceive who the real owner is – and who it is they are actually in business with. Classic examples 
of such stratagems being the use of dummy corporations, shell companies, 42 front men, and 
trusts.43 
In order to hamper such a phenomenon, the anti-money laundering regulation has introduced the 
concept of Ultimate Beneficial Owner (UBO). 44 By mandating the identification of the natural 
person who ultimately benefits from their services, the regulation aims at piercing the corporate 
veil and understanding in concreto who is behind a certain legal arrangement.  
Beneficial owners are defined by article 3, paragraph 6, of the Directive as: 
“any natural person(s) who ultimately owns or controls the customer and/or the natural person(s) on whose behalf 
a transaction or activity is being conducted”.45 
Covered entities are, hence, required to unpack the corporate structure of their customers – even 
where multiple companies and jurisdictions may be involved – to then identify and verify who is 
the individual that ultimately benefits from the legal arrangement and the covered entities’ services. 
In order to facilitate the identification of the Beneficial Owner, article 30, paragraph 3, of the 
Directive now provides for a Beneficial Ownership Registry. Particularly, the Directive requires 
each Member State to establish such a registry and “mandate corporate and other legal entities incorporated 
within their territory are required to obtain and hold adequate, accurate and current information on their beneficial 
ownership, including the details of the beneficial interests held”. Non-compliance with such a duty has to be 
 
41 P. Gilmour, Reexamining the anti-money-laundering framework: a legal critique and new approach to combating money 
laundering in Journal of Financial Crime, 2022, 1 – 2; O. Tucker, The flow of illicit funds. A case study approach to anti-
money laundering compliance, cit., 14. 
42 O. Tucker, The flow of illicit funds. A case study approach to anti-money laundering compliance, cit., 33. 
43 For an analysis of how money launderers can obfuscate beneficial ownership see Financial Action Task 
Force, Concealment of Beneficial Ownership, cit. 
44 O. Tucker, The flow of illicit funds. A case study approach to anti-money laundering compliance, cit., 40; for a detailed 
analysis see the FATF’s sectorial guidance, Financial Action Task Force, FATF Guidance on transparency and 
beneficial ownership, Paris, 2014. 
45 The criteria to identify a beneficial owner or owners are further detailed by the same article, letter a, for 
corporate entities, letter b, for trusts, and, letter c, for foundation and other legal arrangements similar to 
trusts. 
 213 
punished with proportional and dissuasive sanctions.46 However, as clarified by paragraph 8 of the 
same article, covered entities cannot simply base themselves on the information in the registry. 
Rather they shall confirm such information through a risk -based approach. Examples of third-
party providers where such information can be found  for verification purposes  are companies’ 
houses.  
The third and final step of Know Your Customer is the identification of the purpose and intended 
nature of the business relationship. To this end, the customer has to declare the reason why they 
are using the covered entities’ services. For instance, they may declare that the account will be used 
to pay suppliers or to save money to buy a house. This last step simply consists of a unilateral 
declaration of the customer. 
It is rooted in the information gathered through Know Your Customer that the fourth step of 
Compliance Due Diligence has to be pursued. Eminently, covered entities are required to monitor 
the activity of the customer and the ongoing business relationship i n light of the information 
gathered. Particularly, they have to ensure that transactions:  
“are consistent with the obliged entity's knowledge of the customer, the business and risk profile, including where 
necessary the source of funds and ensuring that the documents, data or information held are kept up-to-date”.47 
This last step, also known as transaction monitoring, is directed at identifying suspicious 
transactions, meaning transactions (both incoming and outgoing) not in line with the profile of the 
customer or that signal a risk of criminal activity. 48 The reporting of such suspicious transactions 
is the ultimate goal of the anti -money laundering compliance duties and is the topic of the next 
section. 
 
46 Para 5 of the article established that not only competent authorities and FIUs could access such a registry 
but also any member of the general public. However, the Court of Justice found such an extensive access 
to be disproportionate, see European Court o f Justice, C 53/20 – 601/20 WM and Sovim SA v 
Luxembourg Business Registers, 2022. 
47 Anti-Money Laundering Directive, article 3, paragraph 13.  
48 European Banking Authority, Guidelines on customer due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions 
should consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist financing risk associated with individual business 
relationships and occasional transactions (‘The ML/TF Risk Factors Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive 
(EU) 2015/849), cit., 55, Guidelines 4.72 – 4.75.; Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk 
based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset Service Providers, cit., 81, “Monitoring transactions is an essential 
component in identifying transactions that are potentially suspicious, including in the context of VA transactions. Transactions 
that do not fit the behaviour expected from a customer profile, or that deviate from the usual pattern of transactions, may b e 
potentially suspicious”. 
 214 
 
2.3 The endgame of anti -money laundering compliance: the 
Suspicious Activity Reports  
 
The main end result of Customer Due Diligence is the identification and reporting of suspicious 
activities. Compliance’s aim, when it comes to anti -money laundering, is to create a system of 
decentralized policing. Each of the covered entities is a nexus, a chokepoint, of the economic 
system. Due to their role, such entities have access to a wealth of data regarding their customers 
and connected economic activity. Through their policing, the anti -money laundering regulation 
creates a system of capillary intelligence for the p revention and identification of illicit financial 
flows. To achieve this goal, each of the covered entities has to profile their customer, monitor their 
activity, and report them when suspicious.49 
The duty to report suspicious transactions falls not only on the covered entities as a whole but also 
on their directors and employees. The obligation to report suspicious transactions is, hence, both 
individual – as it falls on each employee of the covered entity to report suspicious activities – and 
collective – as the covered entity as a whole has to create systems that enable such reporting and 
ensure it is correctly performed.50 
The duty to file a Suspicious Activity Report (SAR) is triggered when there is knowledge, suspicion, 
or reasonable grounds to suspect that funds, regardless of the amount involved, are the proceeds 
of criminal activity or are related to terrorist financing.51 All suspicious activities should be reported 
to the Financial Intelligence Unit including attempted transactions. The bar for reporting is overtly 
low as a mere suspicion is sufficient to trigger the duty. This all -encompassing definition of 
suspicious transactions has been criticized by part of the literature as some have argued it h as 
created an overly cautious approach by covered entities that may choose to report as a risk 
 
49 L. dalla Pellegrina – G. Di Maio – D. Masciandaro – M. Saraceno, Are Bankers “Crying Wolf”? Type I, Type 
II Errors and Deterrence in Anti-Money Laundering: The Italian Case, cit., 2. 
50 As provided by article 33, paragraph 1; for more on this topic see section 2.4 on the sanctions provided 
by the Directive. 
51 See article 33, paragraph one, letter, a, the covered entity has a duty of “informing the FIU, including by filing 
a report, on their own initiative, where the obliged entity knows, suspects or has reasonable grounds to suspect that funds, 
regardless of the amount involved, are the proceeds of criminal activity or are related to terrorist financing”. 
 215 
mitigation measure.52 This has flooded financial supervisors with the consequence of increasing 
the noise in the information on suspicious activity and of making the identification of actually risky 
transactions significantly harder.53  
Together with the duty to report a suspicious transaction, two ancillary obligations are provided  
for. First, the covered entity should refrain from carrying out the transactions of which they know 
or suspect the illicit nature.54 Second, they must refrain from informing the customer or any third 
party that a suspicious activity report has been, or will be, filed (so -called prohibition of tipping 
off).55  
The recipient of the suspicious activity reports is an ad hoc entity that should be instituted within 
each jurisdiction: the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU). 56 The Financial Intelligence Unit is 
provided by Recommendation 21 of the FATF’s Standard 57 as transposed by article 32 of the 
Directive.  
Once a suspicious activity report is received, the Unit has to analyse it and, when deemed necessary, 
contact the competent National authority to trigger further investigations. The Unit can also 
request further information to the reporting institution, hence, creating a dialogue concerning the 
(suspicious) customer and/or transaction.  
 
 
52 This phenomenon is labelled by L. dalla Pellegrina – G. Di Maio – D. Masciandaro – M. Saraceno, Are 
Bankers “Crying Wolf”? Type I, Type II Errors and Deterrence in Anti-Money Laundering: The Italian Case, cit., 2, as 
the “Crying Wolf Effect”; B. Villányi, Money laundering: History, regulations, and techniques, cit., 11. 
53 Just to give an idea of the magnitude of this problem, in the United States only two point three million 
SARs are filed annually, meaning over six thousand reports are filed on a daily basis. Numbers of this 
magnitude generate a pressure on the financial supervisors that, rather than being provided with a small 
number of sure leads, are flooded with thousand s of reports which they are mostly unable to correctly 
process and analyse. A. Bello – J. Harvey, From a risk-based to an uncertainty-based approach to anti-money laundering 
compliance, cit., 26, “ Clearly, if banks report everything as suspicious, they effectively report nothing ”; S. Ross – M. 
Hannan, Money laundering regulation and risk-based decision-making, cit., 107. 
54 See article 35, Directive of the European Union, 20 th May 2015, n. 849, an exception to such a duty to 
freeze the transaction is provided by the second paragraph of the same article “ where refraining from carrying 
out transactions referred to in paragraph 1 is impossible or is likely to frustrate efforts to pursue the beneficiaries of a suspected 
operation”. 
55 See article 39, Directive of the European Union, 20th May 2015, n. 849. 
56 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 68. 
57 Financial Action Task Force, International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the Finance of Terrorism 
and Proliferation. The FATF Recommendations, cit., 104 – 106. 
 216 
2.4 The sanctioning infrastructure  
 
The effectiveness of the anti-money laundering infrastructure is reinforced through a sanctioning 
regime provided by Section 4 (article 58 – 62) of the Directive.  
The sanctioning regime stipulated by the Directive is administrative in nature, as the law does not 
directly provide for any criminal sanction. However, the Directive leaves Member States a certain 
leeway, stipulating the latter can substitute administrative sanctions with criminal ones. 58 The 
Directive, thus, gives a baseline that is up to individual States to implement or aggravate. 
The sanctioning system follows a two-pronged approach as it targets, at the same time, legal and 
natural persons – i.e., the covered entities and their employees.  
From a natural person’s perspective, article 58, paragraph 3, states: 
“Member States shall ensure that where obligations apply to legal persons in the event of a breach of national 
provisions transposing this Directive, sanctions and measures can be applied to the members of the management 
body and to other natural persons who under national law are responsible for the breach”. 
Hence, when a breach of anti -money laundering compliance duties is ascertained, the liability 
should also extend to the individuals. Such individuals pertain to two categories. First, the members 
of the management body, which, under article 46, are responsible for the set-up, implementation, 
and supervision of the compliance model. Second, other natural persons who under, national law, 
are responsible for the breach. This is an ample category that can include any employee that plays 
a role in the anti -money laundering cycle , from the Know Your Customer Officer to the 
salesperson – e.g., a salesperson who has tipped of the client concerning a S uspicious Activity 
Report being filed.59 
 
58 See article 58, para 2, “Member States may decide not to lay down rules for administrative sanctions or measures for 
breaches which are subject to criminal sanctions in their national law. In that case, Member States shall communicate to the 
Commission the relevant criminal law provisions”. 
59 See in this sense the crime provided in the Italian system by art. 55, para. 4, of the anti-money laundering 
law (D.lgs. 231/2007) for breach of the prohibition to tip off.  
 217 
From the legal person ’s perspective, article 60, paragraph s 5 and 6, provide for a series of 
mandatory criteria based on which individual actions by employees should also be ascribed to the 
covered entity. The criteri a are different if the person responsible holds a “leading position”  or 
not. To ascertain if the employee has a leading position the Directive gives three alternative criteria: 
the person has “(a) power to represent the legal person; (b) authority to take decisions on behalf of the legal person; 
or (c) authority to exercise control within the legal person”. If the employee has a leading position, the legal 
person should be held liable if the breach was committed in its interest. In contrast, if the employee 
responsible for the breach is not in a leading position, the legal person is only responsible where 
the lack of supervision or control by a leading person has made it possible to commit the breach 
for the benefit of that legal person by a person under its authority.  Hence, in this second case to 
the positive element of the benefit for the legal person a second parameter is added, the lack of 
supervision of control which has to be causally connected with the breach. 
Concerning the breaches which shall give rise to sanctions, the Directive again provides for a 
baseline. Article 59 states that, at a minimum, Member States shall sanction breaches that are 
serious, repeated, systematic, or a combination thereof , affecting four areas: 1) customer due 
diligence; 2) suspicious transaction reporting; 3) record-keeping; 4) internal controls.  
Finally, regarding the type of sanctions and their determination, the Directive only gives a baseline 
for those applied to legal persons. The sanctions applied to individuals are, hence, left to the 
discretion of Member States. The sanctions listed by the Directive for legal persons are: 
“(a) a public statement which identifies the natural or legal person and the nature of the breach60 (b) an order 
requiring the natural or legal person to cease the conduct and to desist from repetition of that conduct; (c) where an 
obliged entity is subject to an authorisation, withdrawal or suspension of the authorisation; (d) a temporary ban 
against any person discharging managerial responsibilities in an obliged entity, or any other natural person, held 
responsible for the breach, from exercising managerial functions in obliged entities; (e) maximum administrative 
pecuniary sanctions of at least twice the amount of the benefit derived from the breach where that benefit can be 
determined, or at least EUR 1 000 000”.61 
Regarding their determination, article 60, paragraph 4, provides for the following criteria:  
 
60 The publication of the sanction can be avoided or postponed in specific cases provided by article 60. 
61 A specific sanctioning system is provided by art. 59, para 3, when the covered entity concerned is a 
financial or credit institution. 
 218 
“(a) the gravity and the duration of the breach; (b) the degree of responsibility of the natural or legal person held 
responsible; (c) the financial strength of the natural or legal person held responsible, as indicated for example by the 
total turnover of the legal person held responsible or the annual income of the natural person held responsible; (d) 
the benefit derived from the breach by the natural or legal person held responsible, insofar as it can be determined; 
(e) the losses to third parties caused by the breach, insofar as they can be determined; (f) the level of cooperation of 
the natural or legal person held responsible with the competent authority; (g) previous breaches by the natural or 
legal person held responsible”. 
To sum up, the Directive gives a baseline in terms of sanctioning to then be transposed or 
aggravated by Member States. The sanctioning regime follows a double binary approach punishing 
both the entity as a whole and the individuals responsible for the breach.  
 
3. The application of the  anti-money laundering  regulation to crypto -
assets  
 
The overarching framework we have just sketched has been fully extended  to the crypto -assets 
market. Eminently, so  far, the core of the crypto -assets’ policing strategy has focused on the 
extension of the full spectrum of classic anti-money laundering compliance duties to a series of 
intermediaries identified in this emerging market (as clarified in chapter three, section two). To this 
end, the Fifth Anti-money Laundering Directive62 added wallet providers and exchangers among 
the list of covered entities enumerated by article 2.63 Covered entities in the crypto -market are, 
therefore, under the same above-detailed compliance duties as any other intermediary. The MiCaR 
and the Anti-money Laundering Package take a similar approach. Apart from an extension in the 
 
62 Directive of the European Union, 30th May 2018, n. 843. 
63 As detailed in the previous chapter this list of covered entities will be complemented, in the same fashion 
as the Fifth Directive, by the Anti -money Laundering Regulation to match the Financial Action Task 
Force’s latest Guidance.  
 219 
number of covered entities, no new or customized anti-money laundering duty is provided for 
crypto-asset service providers.64 
As explained in the previous chapters, this approach is controversial. 65 Eminently, the core of 
crypto-assets’ innovation lies in the introduction of a new architecture for financial transactions. 
One that can be summarized with the two terms decentralization and disintermediation.66 In turn, 
these two elements create distinct challenges for the implementation of traditional compliance 
duties.67 
Let’s start with decentralization. In a decentralized environment, the application of controls 
envisioned for vertical, human operated arrangements is complex. Compliance Due Diligence and 
Suspicious Activity Reports are thought to be applied by centralized arrangements that function 
in a hierarchical fashion. The same goes for the connected sanctioning system where allocation of 
responsibility is connected with the internal organizational structure of the arrangement. In 
decentralized autonomous organizations and decentralized networks, the kingpin is the code – 
meaning the smart contract the DAO is rooted in – rather than the humans. In this sense, the 
identification of individual responsibilities is complex as many of the actions are performed by the 
code in an automatic fashion. 68 In such environments, humans may, hence, miss the concrete 
ability to execute the mandated actions.  
The second critical point is disintermediation: in a disintermediated environment the 
implementation of an intermediary -centred approach misses a whole chunk of the market  – i.e., 
 
64 For an analysis see section two of the previous chapter; for an overview of specific red flags provided for 
VASPs see Financial Action Task Force, Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Red Flag Indicators Associated 
with Virtual Assets, Paris, 2020. 
65 See, in this sense, the critique raised by the French Autorité de Contrôle Prudentiel et Résolution in O. 
Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response? , cit., 2, “ the 
regulation of disintermediated finance cannot simply replicate the systems that currently govern traditional finance. On the 
contrary, regulations must take into account the specific features of DeFi ”; World Economic Forum, Pathways to the 
Regulation of Crypto-Assets: A Global Approach, cit., 7, “crypto-assets and their ecosystem do not always fit squarely into 
the existing activity -based, intermediary-focused approach of regulation, even where crypto -asset activities mirror those of the 
traditional financial sector. Some of the reasons for this include an inability to classify either various tokens under the existing 
definitions or the intermediary in providing services to users”. 
66 On the connection between decentralization and disintermediation see O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, 
“Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 2.  
67 World Economic Forum, Pathways to the Regulation of Crypto-Assets: A Global Approach, cit., 6, “Crypto-assets, 
and the technologies on which they are based, present unique technical and structural challenges to regulation due to the 
decentralized, transparent and open-source nature of the ecosystem”; C. Rueckert, Cryptocurrencies and fundamental rights, 
cit., 4.  
68 World Economic Forum, Pathways to the Regulation of Crypto-Assets: A Global Approach, cit., 9. 
 220 
all those transactions that are not processed by an intermediary.69 Moreover, it creates the problem 
of how should covered entities act when their customer transacts  with a self-hosted wallet.70 If 
individuals can simply avoid the anti -money laundering checkpoints, the whole control 
infrastructure loses its effectiveness.  
This fallacy is clearly identified by the French Autorité de contrôle prudentiel et de résolution in a recently 
published paper focused on Decentralized Finance. The authority clearly states: 
“DeFi,71 based on blockchain infrastructures, has characteristics that make it difficult to assimilate with 
"traditional" finance. More specifically, traditional finance is critically reliant on a number of intermediaries 
(banks, insurance companies, clearing houses, etc.), which carry out key operations and manage the associated 
risks, and on which the bulk of the regulatory burden logically falls. However, the very concept of DeFi consists 
essentially in building an area of finance without intermediaries or trusted third parties (…) The first pitfall lies in 
trying to replicate the existing regulatory framework only and exhaustively, without taking into account the specific 
characteristics (and therefore the potential benefits) of DeFi. This tempting approach leads to restricting the focus of 
analysis to the identification of intermediaries to whom requirements should be applied”.72 
In addition, even when such intermediaries are used, the illicit source of the proceeds could be 
hidden behind so many layers of unchecked transactions to nullify the effectiveness of compliance 
controls.73 If the covered entity only focuses on the current customer and its business relationship 
it will miss the whole chain of self-hosted transactions leading to that specific account.  
 
69 In this sense see US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 35, 
“the present reliance on centralized VASPs to comply with AML/CFT and sanctions obligations is not likely to sufficiently 
mitigate illicit finance risks associated with DeFi services”. 
70 See ex multis Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and 
Virtual Asset Service Providers, cit., “P2P transactions are not explicitly subject to AML/CFT controls under the FATF 
Standards. This is because the Standards generally place obligations on intermediaries, rather than on individuals themselves  
(with some exceptions, such as requirements related to implementing targeted financial sanctions). The FATF recognises that 
P2P transactions could pose specific ML/TF risks, as they can potentially be used to avoid AML/CFT controls in the 
FATF Standards. Where VA transfers occur on a P2P basis, there are no obliged entities involved in preventing or mitigating 
ML/TF risks”; M. Campbell-Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global anti-money laundering governance, cit., 286 – 
287. 
71 DeFi is an abbreviation for Decentralized Finance. For a definition of DeFi see footnote 138. 
72 See O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 27. 
73 The same problem is qualitatively different when it comes to traditional financial transactions. Eminently, 
as all transactions in such a market are intermediated, the main problem there is connected with the lack of 
effective controls by one or more of t he intermediaries involved in the chain of transactions. Conversely, 
in a disintermediated environment the chain of self -hosted transactions is under no control making the 
problem not one of effective implementation of the legislation rather one of architectural impossibility. 
 221 
Furthermore, the classic anti-money laundering strategy was envisioned for a world where the 
storage of financial data was entirely rooted in private, fragmented ledgers. In contrast, blockchain 
introduces a new concept of financial transparency , one where transactions are stored in public, 
logically unified ledgers. 74 The transition warrants the question of whether customer -based 
profiling is still the best strategy available for financial monitoring. Eminently, if wallet holders’ 
identities and profiles are much harder to access, blockchain transaction information is 
comparatively more transparent. Any covered entity can directly analyse a single transaction taking 
into account any connected (past or contemporary) transaction irrespective if it has been carried 
out with their systems, by another intermediary, or in a disintermediated fashion . This warrants 
the question of whether, with crypto -assets, the system should shift from a customer -based one 
(revolving around the concept of Know Your Customer and customer’s profile) to a transaction-
based one (revolving around the concept of Know Your Transaction and transaction patterns).75 
Finally, the way financial data is stored also affects the relation between the supervisor and the 
supervised. In the traditional system, supervisors only had mediated access to financial data as the 
latter was held in private ledgers owned by the intermediaries. Blockchain disintermediates the 
relation between supervisors and financial data granting them direct access to the ledger. This 
means that, at least from the perspective of financial transactions, the supervisor has immediate 
access to the underlying data. This opens new possibilities in terms of supervision and calls for a 
more active role by public authorities, contemporarily attenuating the architectural necessity to 
delegate financial policing to private institutions. Embracing a more proactive approach, rooted in 
direct access to financial data, supervisors could directly identify suspicious transactions and only 
then trigger an information request to the relevant covered entity. This would relieve covered 
entities from part of the compliance costs , thus  fostering competition in the market. We will 
further discuss how such an approach could work in section six-four. 
As detailed in the following sections, all these new instances are emerging as a parallel strategy to 
classic intermediary-based regulation. The increasing use of blockchain analytics, the reflections 
 
74 J. Hirshman – Y. Huang – S. Macke, Unsupervised approaches to detecting anomalous behavior in the bitcoin 
transaction network, Technical report, Stanford University, 2013, 1. 
75 As clearly stated by M. Campbell-Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global anti-money laundering governance, cit., 
287, “ CCs reverse the traditional problem confronting AML efforts, from “parties known -transactions unknown” to 
“transactions known-parties unknown”. 
 222 
concerning the regulation of software developers and compliance -by-design, as well as the 
qualification and policing of peer-to-peer transactions all constitute examples of such a trend.  
Notwithstanding these problems, the above  does not mean the intermediary-centred approach 
lacks any merit.76 As detailed in the first and second chapter, the crypto-market has significantly 
evolved from its beginnings and has partially moved on from its initial fully decentralized structure: 
centralized, or partially centralized networks (as permissioned blockchains) and blockchain -based 
applications have emerged. Likewise, centralized crypto-assets service providers are widely used 
for ease or lack of specialized knowledge.77 In this sense, the regulation of intermediar ies is still a 
valid resource. 78 When the activity pursued is qualitatively similar to that of a traditional 
intermediary it is only fair to impose similar safeguards.  
However, the previous approach should be adapted in two senses. First, compliance duties applied 
to centralized entities  (as Crypto -asset Service Providers)  should take into account the 
disintermediation factor and exploit its advantages while mitigating risks.  As detailed throughout 
this text, the blockchain provides for a different architecture for digital exchanges of value  and 
financial data storage. Such a different model should inform the way compliance checks are carried 
out by covered entities. For instance, the transparency and accessibility of blockchain data can be 
used as a means to better evaluate the risk factor of a customer by including in the risk assessment 
an analysis of its previous, publicly available, transactions.79 Second, a customized strategy should 
be devised for that part of the market and those actors that do not fit within the framework of 
classic centralized arrangements. Otherwise, the risk being the uncontrolled growth of a parallel 
unregulated market performing the same activities as the centralized one.80 
 
76 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, 27. 
77 I. Karasek -Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering instruments and European data protection 
requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces, cit., 2 – 3. 
78 I. Karasek -Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering instruments and European data protection 
requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces, cit., 3. 
79 For how such systems have been integrated in compliance practices see the EBA guidelines detailed in 
section 3.1. 
80 European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document Accompanying the document Report from the 
Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of the risk of money laundering and terrorist 
financing affecting the internal market and relating to cross-border activities, cit., 95, “DeFi applications can be used to avoid 
existing AML/CFT legislation and the “travel rule” obligations as set out by the FATF ”; World Economic Forum, 
Decentralized Finance (DeFi) Policymaker Toolkit , cit., 18; as underlined by European Central Bank Crypto -
assets Task Force, Crypto-Assets: Implications for financial stability, monetary policy, and payments and market 
infrastructures, cit., 30, the increasing regulation of centralized service providers coupled with a lack of 
 223 
Given the multi -layered nature of the topic , we will proceed as follows. The rest of the present 
chapter will delve into how the regulator has addressed the first identified problem: the 
customization of pre-existing compliance duties to intermediaries in the crypto -market. Section 
four will analyse how the overarching framework has been applied in concreto to the crypto-assets 
sector by the Union’s supervisory authority. Particularly, we will analyse the upcoming European 
Banking Authorities’ Guidelines on red flag indicators. Section five and six will analyse two pieces 
of legislation that extend specific compliance requirements to crypto -intermediaries: respectively 
the registration regime and the travel rule regulation. Section seven will then examine how the 
characteristics of the blockchain, particularly its transparency and accessibility, opened new 
avenues for financial monitoring and supervision. The next chapter will, then, delve into the 
second problem we have identified: the regulation of decentralized arrangements that do not fall 
within the scheme of covered entities. The chapter will analyse how regulators have, or have not, 
addressed the extension of compliance duties to such headless organizations. 
 
3.1 The EBA’s red flag indicators. The anti -money laundering 
regulation in motion 
 
The preceding section has examined the application of the primary legislation to the field of crypto-
assets. However, as detailed  in section two -one, the anti -money laundering regulation is multi-
layered in nature. Due to the risk -based approach, the overarching regulation is envisioned as a 
flexible instrument to be customized to the characteristics of the single industry and customer.81 
As detailed in the section on the risk -based approach, this customization effort is fundamentally 
carried out by two entities : the supervisor and the covered entity. The supervisor  – at the Union 
level the European Banking Authority – publishes guidelines that trace the boundaries and identify 
the fundamental risk factors. The covered entity, then, within these boundaries, drafts the internal 
guidelines that define its operating model depending on the risk appetite. 
 
regulation of disintermediated ones may generate the unintended “risk of an uneven playing field and a shift from 
centralised to decentralised services”. 
81 B. Villányi, Money laundering: History, regulations, and techniques, cit., 11. 
 224 
For instance, the supervisor may identify a certain area as high risk. It will then be up to the covered 
entity to decide how to apply this guidance . It can do so  by mandating enhance d due diligence 
controls on each customer operating in the area or it can make the business choice of not accepting 
such clients. 
Guidelines are, hence, a key part of the concrete implementation of anti-money laundering duties 
as they impact the risk calculation and compliance measures applied by covered entities. 
At the Union level , article 17 of the Anti-money Laundering Directive entrusts to the European 
Banking Authority the issuance of such guidelines. The currently in-force Guideline was published 
on the 1st of March 2021.82 This Guideline does not directly address risk mitigation measures to be 
implemented by the crypto-asset industry. Rather, it introduces a specific guideline (9.20) on how 
covered entities should mitigate the risk posed by customers that offer services related to crypto -
assets. The Guideline is very short and is mostly aimed at underlining the significant risk connected 
with this industry. For instance, guideline 9.23 expressly prohibits covered entities from applying 
Simplified Due Diligence controls when dealing with crypto-related services.  
Of much greater relevance for our ends is the upcoming set of Guidelines, whose last draft version 
was published on the 31 st of May 2023.83 Particularly, the Draft introduces a Sectorial Guideline 
(Guideline 21) specifically addressed to crypto-asset service providers. 
The Sectorial Guideline constitut es the first effort by the Union ’s supervisor to customize anti -
money laundering controls to the characteristics of the crypto-market. Eminently, if the in-force 
Guideline simply provides a means for non-crypto covered entities to protect themselves from the 
risks posed by crypto-assets, the upcoming text is aimed at guiding CASPs in mitigating the risk s 
posed by their business model. In a sense, the first Guideline takes an external perspective to 
crypto-risk, and the upcoming ones takes, for the first time, an internal perspective. It is the same 
Banking Authority to clearly express this objective: 
 
82 European Banking Authority, Guidelines on customer due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions 
should consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist financing risk associated with individual business 
relationships and occasional transactions (‘The ML/TF Risk Factors Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive 
(EU) 2015/849, EBA/GL/2021/02, cit. 
83 European Banking Authority, Consultation Paper Guidelines amending Guidelines EBA/2021/02 on customer due 
diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions should consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist  
financing risk associated with individual business r elationships and occasional transactions (‘The ML/TF Risk Factors 
Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/849, cit. 
 225 
“The EBA performed a review of the revised ML/TF Risk Factors Guidelines and concluded that the elements 
set out in these guidelines could be extended to CASPs but also that CASPs had specific characteristics 
differentiating them from credit institutions and other financial institutions and thus these specificities together with 
crypto-assets’ inherent ones would benefit from further guidance and clarification. For instance, as CASPs 
products and services offered differ from credit institutions and other financial institutions’ products and services, 
adding guidance, specifically addressed to CASPs, on the risk factors related to these products and services could be 
of benefit for CASPs. An example is the product’s increasing-risk factor when CASPs products entail privacy-
enhancing features or offer a higher degree of pseudonymity such as mixers or tumblers, obfuscated ledger 
technology, Internet Protocol (IP) anonymizers, ring signatures, stealth addresses, ring confidential transactions, 
atomic swaps, non-interactive zero-knowledge proofs and so-called privacy coins. Another example is that as the 
area of crypto assets is new, different of other assets’ areas and in constant evolution, additional guidance on firms’ 
staff’s AML/CFT trainings regarding crypto assets unusual transactions or more advanced transaction 
monitoring analytical tools would be of benefit”.84 
In line with the mentioned objective, the sectorial Guideline introduces a detailed list of risk factors 
(so-called red flags) , and a set of mitigating measures. The red flags  are divided in four risk 
categories depending on the source of the risk: 1) Product, services, and transaction; 2) Customer; 
3) Country or geographical; 4) Distribution channel.85  
The EBA identifies two overarching elements that characterize the general crypto -risk and one 
that enhances it. The two characteristics of the crypto -risk are the transnational ity of the 
transaction model and customer base and the instantaneity of the value exchanges. The risk-
enhancing factor is the provision of “ products or services which contain privacy -enhancing features or which 
offer a higher degree of anonymity”.  
Besides these general risk elements, the EBA provides for a detailed list of risk factors CASPs have 
to take into account when assessing their customers. These factors are both general and 
technology-specific.  
 
84 European Banking Authority, Consultation Paper Guidelines amending Guidelines EBA/2021/02 on customer due 
diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions should consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist  
financing risk associated with individual business r elationships and occasional transactions (‘The ML/TF Risk Factors 
Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/849, cit., 36. 
85 These are recurring risk categories in the anti-money laundering field, see O. Tucker, The flow of illicit funds. 
A case study approach to anti-money laundering compliance, cit., 80. 
 226 
General risk factor means a risk indicator recurring in the anti -money laundering regulation and 
not specific to crypto-assets. These are, for instance, the fact a customer is a shelf company86 or a 
politically exposed person (PEP),87 a transaction pattern unusual or of high frequency, volume, or 
value inconsistent with the KYC. These factors are not particularly interesting as they are in line 
with the pre-existing regulation. Hence, they do not signal a customization effort but rather a 
reiteration of the previous strategy. 
Of particular interest are the crypto -specific risk factors as they indicate which elements of the 
crypto-market are viewed as particularly sensitive by the supervisor. The analysis of such factors 
reveals four fundamental areas of interest.  
First, the use of privacy-enhancing services or anonymity-enhancing features “such as, but not limited 
to, mixers or tumblers, obfuscated ledger technology, Internet Protocol (IP) anonymizers, ring signatures, stealth 
addresses, ring confidential transactions, atomic swaps, non -interactive zero-knowledge proofs and so-called privacy 
coins” is perceived as particularly risky.  
The transparent nature of blockchain transactions has led to the development of a series of 
technological solutions aimed at increasing privacy. This is mainly achieved by reducing the 
transparency of the blockchain ledger or the traceability of the transa ction trail. For instance, 
privacy coins – such as Monero – employ a type of blockchain in which the ledger, while public, 
does not bear intelligible information concerning the transactions carried out. Such solutions can 
be developed and used for perfectly legitimate reasons as users may wish to add an additional layer 
of privacy in their financial transactions. As we will see in section seven -three of the present 
chapter, some argue that the implementation of such solutions may even be compulsory under the 
General Data Protection Regulation. However, as any instrument that allows individuals to move 
 
86 A shelf company is defined by the FATF as an “incorporated company with inactive shareholders, directors, and 
secretary and is left dormant for a longer period even if a customer relationship has already been established”, see Financial 
Action Task Force, Concealment of Beneficial Ownership, Paris, 2018, 5.  
87 A Politically Exposed Person is defined by article 3, number 9 of the Anti Money Laundering Directive 
as “a natural person who is or who has been entrusted with prominent public functions and includes the following: (a) heads 
of State, heads of government, ministers and deputy or assistant ministers; (b) members of parliament or of similar legislati ve 
bodies; (c) members of the governing bodies of political parties; (d) members of supreme courts, of constitutional courts or of 
other high-level judicial bodies, the decisions of which are not subject to further appeal, except in exceptional circumstances; (e) 
members of courts of auditors or of the boards of central banks; (f) ambassadors, chargés d'affaires and high -ranking officers 
in the armed forces; (g) members of the administrative, management or supervisory bodies of State -owned enterprises; (h) 
directors, deputy directors and members of the board or equivalent function of an international organization ”. Due to their 
connection with the public apparatus these individuals are considered to be exposed at a higher risk of 
corruption and money laundering. 
 227 
in the shadows, privacy-enhancing tools have a relevant criminogenic potential. This is particularly 
worrying considering that these tools obfuscate the only information covered entities and 
investigators sometimes have: the transaction trail. When dealing with self -hosted wallet s or 
DAOs, blockchain transparency is all you have. Due to this element, the anti -money laundering 
supervisor has increasingly identified these tools as high risk.  
Particularly, the Guidance identifies privacy -enhancing technologies as both an overarching risk 
and a specific one among the product, services, and transaction risk factors. 
The second area of concern identified by the Guideline is  the interaction or use of self -hosted 
addresses or unregulated DeFi services. The fact a customer has interacted with self -hosted 
addresses or DeFi, or is a DeFi service, is categorized as a risk -enhancing factor. In this sense, it 
seems that the legislature tries to solve t he absence of a specific strategy for the policing of DeFi 
and self-hosted addresses (the disintermediated and decentralized part of the crypto -market) by 
identifying them as high-risk. Unable to reign on disintermediation it indicates to the intermediated 
side of the market to be wary of the disintermediated one. Such a designation makes, in turn, each 
interaction between these two parts of the market more burdensome and costly.  
Third, technological literacy is considered a key risk-mitigating factor. The Guideline identifies as 
high-risk customers “a vulnerable person or a person who displays very little knowledge and understanding of 
crypto assets or the related technology, which may increase the risk that the customer is being used as a money mule”. 
Fourth, the interaction with services or products not compliant with the MiCa Regulation.  This 
risk factor is aimed at reinforcing the effectiveness of the MiCaR regulation. 
Concerning the mitigating measures a CASP can apply, the Guideline mostly refers to traditional 
measures such as obtaining evidence on the source of funds, source of wealth and increasing the 
frequency of monitoring of crypto-assets transactions.88 However, of particular relevance for our 
ends is the frequent referral made to the use of blockchain analytics tools. These are identified by 
the EBA as a key mitigating factor to ensure the correct monitoring of the customer’s transactions 
 
88 For the entirety of such measures see guideline 21.12 in European Banking Authority, Consultation Paper 
Guidelines amending Guidelines EBA/2021/02 on customer due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions 
should consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist financing risk associated with individual business 
relationships and occasional transactions (‘The ML/TF Risk Factors Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive 
(EU) 2015/849, cit., 30. 
 228 
and connected risk assessment. We will further delve into this topic in section seven of the present 
chapter. 
 
4. The registration duties. A way in for ex-ante compliance 
 
Recommendation 14 of the Financial Action Task Force’s Standard stipulates that providers of 
Money or Value Transfer Services (MVTS) should be either licensed or registered. The aim of this 
requirement is twofold.  
On the one hand, clearly identify ing the providers of services that may generate a money 
laundering risk and are not otherwise licensed or registered (as financial institutions or insurance 
companies). MVTS can operate as small businesses or even as individual brokers and their 
identification can constitute a challenge per se.89 Hence, hampering supervision and enforcement. 
Through mandatory registration, the supervisor is provided with a clear understanding of the 
market’s conformation and can better assess the connected risk.  
On the other hand, the registration of covered entities allows supervisors to operate a pre-emptive 
evaluation. This permits to verify that, before starting their operations, the covered entity has 
already in place the necessary compliance safeguards. This is of particular relevance for smaller 
businesses or new industries. Through registration requirements, the legislat ure guarantees that 
such entities are aware of their compliance duties before commencing operations.  This as they 
have to guarantee their compliance with anti-money laundering duties before entering the market. 
Furthermore, the registration process (should) become a moment of dialogue and mutual learning 
 
89 For an example of such a risk see the regulation of Hawalas. Hawalas are a system traditional within the 
Muslim community to move money nationally and internationally. Hawalas are based on networks of 
individuals based in different countries or different parts of the same country usually connected by family 
and/or ethnic ties. To move money, the customer deposits the sum at the hawala intermediary based in its 
location, the money can then be withdrawn by the receiver at the hawala intermediary at the receiving end. 
The money never physically moves as the sending and receiving intermediary’s keep an open account 
between themselves and settle it in batches. Hawalas were identified as particularly high risk due to their 
informal nature and absence of overview. For this reason, hawalas have been included among MTVS and 
are, hence, under a duty of licensing/registration to allow supervisor to have an overview of hawalas in 
their jurisdiction and apply risk mitigating measures. For an overview of the regulation se e International 
Monetary Fund, Regulatory Frameworks For Hawala and Other Remittance Systems, Washington D.C., 2005.  
 229 
between the covered entity and the supervisor. Especially, when it comes to new business models, 
the registration process is ideally a moment where the overarching framework is adapted to the 
single infrastructure and business model.  
The FATF’s Guidance on crypto -assets explicitly extends the requirement, provided by 
Recommendation 14, to crypto-asset service providers, mandating these should be either licensed 
or registered.90  
Following the Guidance, from a geographical perspective, the registration/licensing should be 
applied, at a minimum, where the covered entity is created or, in case of an individual, resides. 91 
However, the jurisdictions where services or products are offered, and the jurisdictions where the 
CASP conducts its operations can also require licensing or registration. 92 The Guidance specifies 
that such a broader coverage is not essential under the FATF Standard. Nonetheless, it constitutes 
the safer course and is, hence, recommended. 93 To identify the location where the CASP is 
operating, the Guidance then offers a series of criteria: the location of offices and servers, presence 
of promotional communications targeting specific countries/markets, the language on the CASP’s 
website and/or mobile application, etc.94 
When it comes to the concrete implementation of this duty, ample leeway is left to States.95 Neither 
the Standard, nor the Guidance provide for a detailed clarification of how Recommendation 14 
should be applied. Rather, the focus of the FATF is teleologic. The aim of the registration is to 
establish an ex-ante control regarding the concrete ability of the service provider to comply with 
the anti-money laundering requirements. To this end, the Guidance simply provides that, as part 
 
90 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 22; Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual 
Asset Service Providers, cit., 107. 
91 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 22. 
92 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 107; Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual assets and virtual 
asset service providers, cit., 23. 
93 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 44. 
94 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 45; these are recurring parameters when it comes to the identification of the location of 
a digital provider’s activity and can, hence, be seen as a mere exemplification, for an example see the Yahoo 
v. Belgium case, Cour de Cassation, first of December 2015, P.13.2082.N.  
95 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 43; The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 84, “ the 
standards for VASP registration or licensing are extremely wide and varied around the world”. 
 230 
of the registration process, the supervisory authority should require the CASP to meet a series of 
criteria. Such criteria should include the verification that: 
“prior to launch, their AML/CFT programs, including policies, procedures and organization taking into account 
the characteristics of the VASP’s activity (i.e., types of VAs and transactions, targeted customers, distribution 
channels), are implemented or able to be implemented once launched. This could 
include judgement as to the competence and trustworthiness of compliance staff”.96 
It will be, hence, up to the single jurisdiction to decide how to shape its registration regime.  
Due to its ex-ante nature, the licensing/registration phase is one of the loci where the element of 
compliance-by-design emerges. 97 Eminently, in various parts of the Guidance, the FATF 
underlines how the implementation of compliance duties should be guaranteed also through built-
in features.98 These include: 
“limiting the scope of users’ ability to transact anonymously, controlling who can access the arrangement, controlling 
whether/how AML/CFT preventive measures are built into the arrangement and/or by ensuring that 
AML/CFT obligations of obliged entities within the arrangement are fulfilled, e.g. by using software to monitor 
transactions and detect suspicious activity”. 
This ex-ante approach is particularly stressed when it comes to the regulation of Decentralized 
Autonomous Organizations. Eminently, as the registration/licensing is granted before the entity 
commences its operations, there is an increased opportunity for by -design req uirements. 
Particularly, the FATF underlines, with regards to arrangements that claim to be fully automated, 
how the licensing/registration requirement could be the only way  in for the regulation. The 
Guidance states “ the process of creating a nd developing an asset for launch is unlikely to be able to be 
 
96 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 45. 
97 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 46, “VASPs should put in place AML/CFT compliance prior to launch when designing or building 
a new product or service, as it is much more difficult to do so later”. 
98 See Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 46, “VASPs should put in place AML/CFT compliance prior to launch when designing or building 
a new product or service, as it is much more difficult to do so later. Therefore, careful assessment of risks and thorough evaluation 
of mitigation measures at the licensing and registration stage is especially important. Once licensing and registration has taken”. 
place, AML/CFT mitigations which are built into products and services should be maintained and be the subject of 
supervision”. 
 231 
automated”.99 Software development may, through registration requirements, become the way in for 
by-design anti-money laundering duties to be applied pre-launch.100 
In this sense, through registration/licensing supervisory authorities may compel developers to 
create built -in, pre -launch, compliance controls and, correspondingly, only authorize those 
autonomous arrangements that, by-design, comply with the minimum standards provided by the 
anti-money laundering legislation.101 We will further delve into this element in the next chapter, in 
the section devoted to the qualification of the software developer as a crypto-asset service provider. 
Together with the duty of registration, the Guidance provides for a duty of supervision. The 
jurisdiction not only has  a duty to provide for a registration regime but it also has to invest 
sufficient resources to ensure its enforcement. Particularly, the Guidance requires States to devote 
sufficient resources to identify unregistered CASPs and provide for dissuasive sanctions.102  
 
4.1 The European Approach. Between the Fifth Directive, MiCaR, and 
the Anti-money Laundering Package 
 
99 A similar notation, regarding the usual centralization of such projects in the development/launch phase  
is done by O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response? , 
cit., 7, “ The early stages of a project are usually highly centralised: in the software development phase, the core team of 
developers, which is often funded by venture capitalists (who get protocol governance tokens in return), holds the administra tor 
keys of the protocol. It is this team that usually develops the main operating rules of the protocol (fees, voting rules, etc.), which 
are embedded in the program code. The protocol is then deployed on the market, and begins to operate on the basis of the 
encoded rules. In some cases, the developers keep administrator keys during the early stages of the roll-out (test phase), so that 
any malfunctions can be corrected as quickly as possible (with the possibility of shutting down the system). Often, the development 
team forms a foundation or an association”. 
100 The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 138, “The obvious point here is that 
a DAO does not spontaneously come into existence. The above components evidence a concerted effort by a group of people 
acting together to create the infrastructure through which a DAO can be created and operated. The number of participants in 
that group, and their geographic spread may vary, but they are very clearly not decentralised, by necessity. This same group of 
DAO founders will typically oversee the inception and initial development of a DAO and seek to steward it towards increased 
membership and participation, with a view to eventually fully vesting management and control into the community of token 
holders. In this way, many DAOs start of largely centralised but may aspire to significantly more decentralisation than when 
they began life ”; World Economic Forum, Decentralized Finance (DeFi) Policymaker Toolkit , cit., 24, “ Imposing 
regulatory obligations may be easier earlier in the life cycle, where there may be clearly identifiable access points and more room 
to influence the long-term trajectory”. 
101 For an example of how such a by -design compliance model could be shaped in a DAO see chapter 5, 
section 3.  
102 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 23. 
 232 
 
The registration requirement for crypto-asset service providers was implemented, at the European 
level, by the Fifth Anti-money Laundering Directive. 
Article 47 of the Directive states that:  
“Member States shall ensure that providers of exchange services between virtual currencies and fiat currencies, and 
custodian wallet providers, are registered”. 
The Directive, hence, provides for a general overarching duty to be applied by each Member 
State.103 The duty left quite an ample leeway to the Member States which could decide how and up 
to what extent apply it. Additionally, the Directive did not provide for a mutual recognition regime 
for the registration.104 This generated a risk for a multiplication of registration duties for an industry 
inherently transnational.  
The decentralized approach was criticized by the European Banking Authority. In its report of 
2019 on the European anti -money laundering framework, 105 the Authority underlined that the 
provision of a solely national regime was causing fragmentation, in turn hampering the orderly 
functioning of the common market.  
In particular, the Report stated: 
“The EBA has since observed that, in the absence of an EU‐wide approach, there are indications that Member 
States, in anticipation of a forthcoming FATF Mutual Evaluation or to attract VASP business, have adopted 
their own VASP AML/CFT and wider regulatory regimes. As these regimes are not consistent, this creates 
confusion for consumers and market participants, undermines the level playing field and may lead to regulatory 
arbitrage. This exposes the EU’s financial sector to ML/TF risk”.106 
 
103 European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document Accompanying the document Report from the 
Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of the risk of money laundering and terrorist 
financing affecting the internal market and relating to cross-border activities, cit., 99. 
104 For mutual recognition regime is meant a rule that – as it happens with MiCaR’s passporting regime – 
provides that, once registered in a Member State such registration is automatically recognized across the 
bloc. 
105 European Banking Authority, EBA Report on the future of AML/CFT Framework in the EU, cit. 
106 European Banking Authority, EBA Report on the future of AML/CFT Framework in the EU, cit., 36. 
 233 
To solve such a fragmentation, the Authority advised for a unified authorization or registration 
regime for CASPs to be applied and monitored at the Union level.107  
This recommendation has been implemented by the Market in Crypto -assets Regulation. As we 
have detailed in the previous chapter, MiCaR introduces a unified registration regime for all CASPs 
and offerors within the Union. 108 The Regulation also provides for a mutual recognition regime: 
the registration process needs to only be carried out in one jurisdiction (the home Country) and is 
then recognized across the Union (through so -called passporting). Other Member States must 
recognize such authorizations so as to guarantee the Union-wide operativity of service providers.  
While passporting is certainly useful as a means to promote the crypto-market and facilitate intra-
European provision of services it must be noticed it may also create a risk of a regulatory race to 
the bottom. The possibility to simply register in one Member State and then operate across the 
Union may push crypto -companies to forum shop. At the same time, States wishing to attract 
investments and become the European crypto-hub could use their regulatory leeway to lower the 
regulatory bar. This is especially so for a market as the crypto-one which frequently lacks a strong 
physical presence. Such a problem is not exclusive to crypto -companies’ registration and 
characterizes the Union’s market in various area s, as tax law. However, given the risk factors at 
play, a clear baseline – through sectorial Guidelines – should be established, at least at the anti -
money laundering level, clearly detailing  what the minimum requirements for registration are. 
Furthermore, the EBA and, in future , the AMLA, should closely m onitor the registration 
requirements so to avoid such a race to the bottom. 
From a European Union perspective, one of the arising questions with the introduction of MiCaR 
is how the registration duty provided by the Regulation coordinates with the anti -money 
laundering regime. Eminently, as we have mentioned, MiCaR is not an anti -money laundering 
regulation per se. However, especially when it comes to registration requirements, coordination is 
key. Eminently, a duplication of the registration duties would constitute an unnecessary burden 
 
107 European Banking Authority, EBA Report on the future of AML/CFT Framework in the EU, cit., 36, “put in 
place a robust and consistent authorisation or registration regime for VASPs, bearing in mind also the wider need to ensure 
the consistency of approaches to addressing ML/TF risk; and b. establish a mandatory public register of VASPs that will 
be authorised or registered in the EU to support the identification of VASPs that are obliged entities under the AMLD”. 
108 See Chapter three section two.  
 234 
for CASPs and contradict the aim of MiCaR of creating a clear, unified regime for the crypto -
market. 
Regarding the connection between such registration regime and the anti -money laundering 
legislation, the MiCaR explicitly refers to the latter at recital 16. There it states: 
“entities offering services falling within the scope of this Regulation should also comply with applicable anti-money 
laundering and counter-terrorist financing rules of the Union, which integrate international standards”. 
The coordination among the two fields is specified by article 62 which details the application 
process for CASPs. The article, at paragraph 2, letter i), includes among the information to be 
provided by the applicant: 
“a description of the applicant crypto-asset service provider’s internal control mechanisms, policies and procedures to 
identify, assess and manage risks, including money laundering and terrorist financing risks”.109 
The duty at the registration level is then connected, through article 68, with the provisions detailing 
the governance requirements for CASPs. These governance requirements are among the criteri a 
upon which the authorization, under article 59, has to be evaluated and granted. Article 68, 
paragraph 7, states: 
“Crypto-asset service providers shall have in place (…) effective procedures and arrangements for risk assessment, 
to comply with the provisions of national law transposing Directive (EU) 2015/849. They shall monitor and, on 
a regular basis, evaluate the adequacy and effectiveness of those mechanisms, systems and procedures, taking into 
account the scale, the nature and range of crypto-asset services provided, and shall take appropriate measures to 
address any deficiencies in that respect”. To close the circle, article 64, paragraph 1, letter f), lists, 
among the grounds justifying the authorization’s withdrawal, a CASP’s failure to: “have in place 
effective systems, procedures and arrangements to detect and prevent money laundering and terrorist financing in 
accordance with Directive (EU) 2015/849”. 
The connection between the two fields is, then, further strengthened at the supervisory level. 
Article 94 states that supervision in the field of MiCaR shall be exercised “in collaboration with other 
 
109 The MiCaR also provides for a series of non -mandatory consultation processes (the supervisor may 
coordinate with the AML supervisor and FIU) in a series of cases as the withdrawal of authorization, the 
issuance of asset -referenced token, etc. see article 56, paragraph 5a; article 55, paragraph 4a, article 74, 
paragraph 4a. 
 235 
authorities, including authorities competent for the prevention and fight against money laundering and terrorist 
financing”. 
The registration provided by the Fifth Directive will, hence, be superseded by the MiCaR’s regime. 
This is clearly signalled by the absence of any reference to such a regime in any of the legislations 
composing the upcoming Anti -money Laundering Package (which will supersede the Fifth 
Directive).  
At the same  time, the Package provide s for an additional regime customized for anti -money 
laundering compliance. Eminently, the solely national nature of MiCaR’s registration may have the 
unintended effect of subtracting the covered entity from the control of each national Financial 
Intelligence Unit. Most importantly, it may hamper the cooperation between covered entities and 
National FIUs , as it  would create a situation where the only reference point for anti -money 
laundering compliance would be the Unit of the home Country, irrespective of the location of the 
client and/or transaction. Such an arrangement could multiply the cooperation requests and flood 
the national FIUs – especially those located in crypto-hubs – with SARs connected with different 
Member States. At the same time, every follow -up question the FIU or investigative authorities 
would have regarding a SAR would have to be routed through the home Country’s FIU.110 
To avoid such a cooperation nightmare, the pending Proposal for an Anti -money Laundering 
Directive111 provides for an ad hoc regime.  
Article 5 of the Directive provides that: 
“Member States may require (…) crypto-assets service providers operating through agents located in the host 
Member State and operating under either the right of establishment or the freedom to provide services, and whose 
head office is situated in another Member State, to appoint a central contact point in their territory. That central 
contact point shall ensure, on behalf of the entity operating on a cross-border basis, compliance with AML/CFT 
rules and shall facilitate supervision by supervisors, including by providing supervisors with documents and 
information on request”. 
 
110 On the risks of passporting see European Banking Authority, EBA Report on the future of AML/CFT 
Framework in the EU, cit., 46-48 
111 Proposal for a Directive of the European Union, 20th of July 2021, n. 0250. 
 236 
To avoid that the establishment of Contact Points recreates the abovementioned fragmentation, 
hence frustrating the same purpose of passporting, the Directive provides for a unified framework. 
Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Directive states that the (upcoming) European Anti -money 
Laundering Authority (AMLA) shall detail unified criteria in order to determine “the circumstances in 
which the appointment of a central contact point (…) is appropriate, and the functions of the central contact points”. 
In conclusion, the MiCa Regulation supersedes the national registration regime provided by the 
Fifth Directive. Registration is now only required in the home Member State and recognized across 
the Union.112 The MiCa registration is complemented by the establishment of national contact 
points. Such contact points are not mandatory but can be established if required by the Member 
State’s legislation . The establishment of a Contact Point is qualitatively different from to the 
registration regime. Eminently, the registration is an ex-ante requirement that implies an assessment 
of the CASPs governance structure. In contrast, contact points are aimed at facilitating ex-post 
supervision. In this sense, the national supervisor cannot impose additional controls to allow the 
CASP to operate. The contact point simply acts as a point of reference for the supervisor to 
guarantee compliance and facilitate dialogue concerning individual SARs. Contact points, hence, 
constitute a useful solution to avoid the multiplication of registration duties while ma intaining 
national supervision.  
 
4.2  The Registration regime and Decentralized Autonomous 
Organizations. A few thoughts 
 
The Registration regime is quite a straightforward regulation when it comes to centralized 
arrangements: controls regarding  the compliance infrastructure carried out by the supervisor 
before the entity commences its operations in a certain jurisdiction. The same cannot be said when 
 
112 This shift will require an adaptation period as currently both MiCaR and the Fifth Anti -money 
Laundering Directive are in force, hence, creating a duplication of the registration regimes. The unification, 
at a legislative level, will only be completed with the introduction of the AML Package envisioned for 2024. 
In the meanwhile, it will be up to national supervisors to decide how to coordinate the European 
registration regime (provided by MiCaR) with the National one (provided by the National legislation 
implementing the Fifth AML Directive). 
 237 
analysing its implementation to decentralized arrangements. While the regulation of DAOs is the 
topic of the next chapter, a few points have to be addressed here as specifically connected with 
the registration regime. The points raised in this section will, then, b e analysed in more detail in 
chapter five. 
Particularly, two elements stand out as specifically contentious. 
First, the interpretation of the CASP’s “ home jurisdiction” requirement  under MiCaR . The 
Regulation identifies the home jurisdiction with the place where the entity is incorporated, or the 
individual resides. These criteria are already insufficiently clear for entities that operate in a digital 
world, with the risks of choosing the most complacent jurisdiction  – generating the, above -
mentioned, forum shopping phenomenon. However, when it comes to a DAO, the identification 
of the home jurisdiction is further complicated. Eminently, the legal qualification of such entities 
is currently at the fore of the debate. The European regulation has, so far, shied away from directly 
framing and regulating decentralized arrangements.113 The MiCaR explicitly excludes decentralized 
organizations from its purview. This leaves DAOs in a legal vacuum and begs the question of 
whether such arrangements should be incorporated at all. In the end, a DAO is no more than a 
string of code (a bundle o f smart contracts) users can interact with. 114 Software, in general, do es 
not need to be incorporated . Hence, in the absence of ad hoc regulation, the question arises if 
DAOs should be either.  
The requisite of the place of incorporation seems, accordingly, to not be appropriate when it comes 
to DAOs. An option could be to  translate such a parameter as identifying the home jurisdiction 
with the place where the decentralized software is developed. This interpretation would be in line 
with the FATF’s multiple references to pre-launch, engrained compliance. When it comes to pre-
launch requirements, t he object of engrained compliance duties is not the DAO per se, but its 
developer/s. If by -design compliance has to be pursued, the jurisdiction best placed to do so is 
where the developer/s is located. This would also be in line with the manner centralized software 
 
113 As detailed in Chapter 5 the initial text of MiCaR approved by the Parliament did bear a definition of 
Decentralized Autonomous Organization. However, in the final text such definition has been eliminated 
and DAOs have been excluded from the purview of the Regulation. 
114 For an example of a DAO’s functioning see the description of “The DAO” project at Chapter 1, para. 
3.2. 
 238 
is currently regulated. Eminently, the location of the developer is usually identified as the 
jurisdiction where the software legally resides. 
Nonetheless, the identification of such a place may be complex  when it comes to decentralized 
autonomous organizations.  
If the DAO is developed by an incorporated company or a single individual, we have an easy case. 
The registration requirement can be shifted from the CASP’s place of incorporation to the 
developers’. This shift is not textually provided , as the law only refers to the regulated entities’ 
place of incorporation whereas, under this interpretation, the registration would be imposed where 
the regulated entities’ developer is incorporated. Nevertheless, such extensive interpretation is not 
far-fetched and in line  with the criteria detailed by the FATF Guidance. The main pain point of 
this interpretation being the qualification of the software developer as a covered entity. 115 
Eminently, the qualification of the software developer as a covered entity is a prerequisite to 
impose on the latter compliance duties.  
However, if the DAO is developed by a loosely connected network of developers across the world, 
we have a hard er case. In the absence of a clear regulation, the question arises of where the 
developer is located. The risk being either a legal vacuum or a multiplication of the duties for each 
jurisdiction where there is at least one active developer. In such cases, a mere extensive 
interpretation does not seem sufficient. A clear European framework to identify the duties of 
DAOs’ developers – if any – should, hence, be provided to avoid regulatory arbitrage.  
Such a clear framework for the registration of DAOs would be, in any case, advisable. Eminently, 
also considering the liability  – administrative and possibly criminal 116 – connected with non -
compliance, a developer should know the ‘if’, ‘where’, and ‘how’ of their legal duties. Differently, 
a violation of the principle of foreseeability of the criminal sanction could be argued. 117 The 
regulation seems, in contrast, to be, at best , confused. Eminently, notwithstanding the multiple 
 
115 For an in -depth reflection on the qualification of the software developer as CASP see the following 
Chapter. 
116 For more on the sanctioning system see chapter 3, section 2.4. 
117 For an example of how such a case -by-case approach may lead to the criminal indictment of software 
developers see chapter 5 section 5 on the Tornado Cash case. There, the software developer of Tornado 
Cash, a DAO acting as a mixer, has been arrested in co nnection with the actions pursued by its software. 
Such an indictment raises a problem of foreseeability when the compliance duties of software developers 
are not clearly identified.  
 239 
references to engrained compliance, the FATF Guidance excludes mere development from its 
purview. Similarly, the MiCaR explicitly excludes DAOs and issuers from the overall regime. At 
the same time, completely excluding DAOs from any ex-ante controls will be complex, especially 
when these are extensively used for criminal purposes. The risk is, then, a case -by-case approach 
adopted by judiciary and supervisory authorities in the absence of a clear overarching legislation.118  
The second moment of friction is when the registration is required by jurisdictions where the DAO 
operates, but not where it has been developed  – from now on “secondary registration” . As 
underlined by the Task Force, development may be the only window of opportunity for the 
regulator when it comes to decentralized arrangements. Once the DAO is launched, its rules of 
conduct are engrained in the smart contract and no longer modifiable, with non-modifiability being 
one of the main selling points of such arrangements. This begs the question of how post-launch 
compliance can  be imposed on a n autonomous  software. Furthermore, if the DAO is indeed 
decentralized it means no human is in control of its actions. Who should the supervisor then talk 
to in order to enforce such a duty?  
To address this second problem, a clearer registration regime for DAOs should be provided. One 
that, if registration is indeed mandatory, imposes on the home jurisdiction the establishment of 
by-design requirements that allow secondary registration. An example of such requirements being 
the establishment of a compliance governance body that retains at least partial control of the 
DAOs functioning – through kill switch es and/or backdoors that allow the adjustment of the 
smart contracts to the requirements imposed by secondary jurisdictions. Furthermore, rules should 
be imposed to guarantee the DAO does not operate in jurisdictions where it has not been 
registered.119 
 
5. The Travel Rule Regulation. A primer for architectural policy-making? 
 
 
118 For more on this topic see chapter 5. 
119 For an in -depth analysis of possible solutions to the regulation of Decentralized Autonomous 
Organizations see Chapter 5 where the two mentioned strand are further developed. Particularly, for an 
example of a possible governance framework see Chapter 5, Section 3. 
 240 
5.1 An introduction to the Travel Rule 
 
The extension of the travel rule to crypto-assets is fairly recent, however, this is a requirement that 
has long been applied by financial institutions. It is, hence, necessary to concisely detail its general 
discipline before delving into its extension to the crypto-assets market.  
The travel rule is provided by Recommendation 16 of the FATF’s Standard120 which states: 
“Countries should ensure that financial institutions include required and accurate originator information, and 
required beneficiary information, on wire transfers and related messages, and that the information remains with the 
wire transfer or related message throughout the payment chain”. 
As detailed by its interpretative note, the crux of the Recommendation is the mitigation of the risk 
generated by wire transfers. The aim is to avoid that wire transfers can be used as a means to move 
and launder illicit funds. To this end, the travel rule has the purpose of guaranteeing that all the 
parties involved in a wire transfer (sending and receiving financial institution) have a complete 
understanding of the transaction and connected risk factors.  
Eminently, in a wire transfer each intermediary involved only sees its side of the exchange. Each 
financial institution knows its customer and evaluates whether the transaction is in line with its 
profile. However, this creates a one -sided perspective on the risk. To have a complete picture, it 
is necessary that all involved intermediaries not only see their side of the transfer but also the 
counterparties’. This additionally allows to evaluate whether the transaction is part of a pattern and 
connect other related transactions.121 
 
120 These forty Recommendations were published, in their latest version, in 2012, and constitute the 
backbone of the sectorial regulation. See Financial Action Task Force, International standards on combating 
money laundering and the financing of terrorism & proliferation. The FATF Recommendations, cit.  
121 This is particularly relevant to hamper money laundering practices as smurfing or structuring. Smurfing 
consists in dividing a large transaction is several smaller transactions. The aim is avoiding triggering 
compliance controls or automatic SARs that may  be activated above a certain threshold. Furthermore, 
smurfing may be used as a means to conceal the real consistence of a certain transaction, see Department 
of Finance Canada, Updated Assessment of Inherent Risks of Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing in Canada, 
March 2023, 18. 
 241 
To this end, Recommendation 16 states that each wire transfer should include “accurate” 
originator and beneficiary information. Accurate means the information is verified – in the sense 
detailed above – by the covered entity or by the counterparty. 
Recommendation 16 has been implemented within the European Union by Regulation n. 847 of 
2015.122 
The Regulation applies – following article 3, number 9 – to any transfer of funds, at least partially 
executed electronically, where at least one of the two service providers involved in the transaction 
is established within the European Union.123 Encompassed are not all value transfer, as a series of 
exception are provided by article 2 of the Regulation – i.e., cash withdrawals, payments for goods 
and services, transfers of value between two institution s in their own name, etc. In brief, the 
Regulation covers all exchanges of value carried out by two private customers with the 
intermediation of one or more payment service providers. 
The Regulation then details the content of the identification and verification duties.  
On the side of the originator, the service provider has to attach to each transfer of funds the 
following information: the customer’s name, account number, ID number, number of 
identification of the customer, place, and date of birth; for the counterparty, name, and account 
number.124 On the side of the beneficiary, the service provider has to only verify that the 
information required by the Regulation is attached to the wire transfer and verify the veracity of 
the data concerning its customer.  
A key element for the concrete implementation of the travel rule is the allocation of the duty to 
verify the veracity of the information connected with the wire transfer. This is an element that will 
be crucial for the implementation of this rule to crypto-assets.  
As mentioned, the verification duty is a resource-intensive activity in terms of compliance.125 This 
because it entails additional activities by the regulated entities aimed at ascertaining the veracity of 
 
122 Regulation of the European Union, n. 847, 20th May 2015.  
123 For a definition of payment service provider see Directive of the European Union, 25 th November of 
2016, n. 2366.  
124 Such duties are partially reduced by the Regulation where the transfer is within the EU (article 5 ), or 
concerns sums under Euros one thousand (article 6 para. 2). 
125 See section 2.2 of the present chapter. 
 242 
the information provided by the customer. To avoid overburdening covered entities, the travel 
rule breaks down the verification duty between the two intermediaries. Each intermediary only has 
to verify the information pertaining to its customer and simply identify the counterparts. This way 
the verification activity is pursued by the intermediary only concerning the individual with whom 
they have a direct contact – i.e., their customer.  
 
5.2 The extension of the Travel Rule to the crypto-assets market 
 
Trailblazer in the extension of the travel rule to crypto -assets has been the Financial Action Task 
Force. If the applicability of Recommendation 16 to crypto-assets service providers was already 
hinted in the first Guidance of 2015,126 it is only in 2019 that the FATF detailed how such a duty 
should be extended.127 Eminently, the original wording of Recommendation 16 clearly restricted 
its purview to wire transfers.  
Wire transfers were defined as: 
“any transaction carried out on behalf of an originator person (both natural and legal) through a financial 
institution by electronic means with a view to making an amount of money available to beneficiary person at a 
beneficiary financial institution”.128 
Crypto-assets transactions were, hence, initially considered outside of the purview of 
Recommendation 16 for two main reasons. First, CASPs are not qualified as Financial Institutions 
but belong to a separate category. Second, crypto -assets are conventionally not qualified as a 
currency in the anti -money laundering field. 129 At the same time, crypto -assets’ transfers were 
perceived as qualitatively similar to wire transfers in terms of risk. Eminently, transactions in 
 
126 Financial Action Task Force,  Virtual currencies, cit., 10, “ Countries should ensure that when convertible virtual 
currency exchangers conduct convertible VC transfers that are wire transfers, they include required originator and beneficiar y 
information specified by Recommendation 16”. 
127 Financial Action Task Force, The FATF Recommendations, cit., 77, for a chronology of the policy evolution 
see 138; World Economic Forum, Pathways to the Regulation of Crypto-Assets: A Global Approach, cit., 16. 
128 See Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a Risk-based approach for Money or value transfer services, Paris, 
2016, 9. 
129 For a reflection on the definition of crypto-assets see Chapter 3. 
 243 
crypto-assets constitute an exchange of a valuable token executed through electronic means 
between two parties.  
To close this perceived gap, the Guidance of 2019 clarified that Recommendation 16 does apply 
to any exchange of value executed by a CASP. 130 The Guidance explicates that, due to the 
functional and not formal nature of the FATF’s norms, the travel rule has to be applied to any 
exchange of value that, in concreto, performs a function similar to a wire transfer, even if not formally 
qualifiable as a wire transfer. With special regard to crypto-assets, the Guidance explicitly extends 
the purview of the travel rule to two types of operations: 1) traditional wire transfer carried out by 
a CASP; 2) crypto-assets transfers between a CASP and another covered entity.131 
Following our previous analysis, it should be easy to spot the weak point of such an extension: in 
contrast with traditional electronic transfer of funds, transfers of crypto -assets do not always 
involve a covered entity as they can also be carried out wit h or by a self-hosted wallet.132  This is 
not to mean that the extension is per se incorrect. Rather than the extension of a rule envisioned 
for a fully intermediated market – the wire transfers one – to a disintermediated one opens a new 
front not previously envisioned by the policy maker: the policing of peer-to-peer transactions and 
peer-to-intermediated ones which did not previously exist. 
It is the same Guidance to recognize this fallacy and the connected breach crypto -assets open in 
the effectiveness of the travel rule as it states: 
“The FATF recognizes that unlike traditional fiat wire transfers, not every VA transfer may involve (or be 
bookended by) two obliged entities, whether a VASP or other obliged entity such as a FI. In instances in which a 
VA transfer involves only one obliged entity on either end of the transfer (e.g., when an ordering VASP or other 
obliged entity sends VAs on behalf of its customer, the originator, to a beneficiary that is not a customer of a 
beneficiary institution but rather an individual VA user who receives the VA transfer using his/her own 
distributed ledger technology (DLT) software, such as an unhosted wallet), countries should still ensure that the 
obliged entity adheres to the requirements of Recommendation 16 with respect to their customer (the originator or 
 
130 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk based approach to virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 29. 
131 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk based approach to virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 29. 
132 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk based approach to virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 30; Financial Action Task Force,  Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual 
Asset Service Providers, cit., 65. 
 244 
the beneficiary, as the case may be). The FATF does not expect that VASPs and financial institutions, when 
originating a VA transfer, would submit the required information to individual users who are not obliged entities. 
VASPs receiving a VA transfer from an entity that is not a VASP or other obliged entity (e.g., from an 
individual VA user using his/her own DLT software, such as an unhosted wallet), should obtain the required 
originator information from their customer”.133 
Such a weakness is, as detailed in the remainder of this thesis, cross -sectional to the whole anti -
money laundering strategy in the field. As the market moves from a completely intermediated to 
an (at least partially) disintermediated electronic funds transfer system, an intermediary -centred 
strategy will necessarily miss a part of connected transactions. If traditional wire transfers are 
always carried out by an intermediary, the same does not apply to crypto-assets transfers.134 
When it comes to the travel rule there is one specific type of disintermediated transfer that 
generates a legal puzzle: those transfers that are intermediated only on one side of the transaction 
– meaning a CASP-to-self-hosted transaction. 
An exchange of value that is completely disintermediated generates a problem of efficacy  of the 
legislation. In contrast, a transfer only unilaterally intermediated creates a problem of 
interpretation. In the former case, there is no doubt that the Regulation does not apply. The 
transaction is carried out by two private parties that are under no obligation to c omply with the 
anti-money laundering legislation. In contrast , when the transaction is carried out between a 
covered entity and an individual this cr eates a new scenario  compared to the pre -existing wire 
transfer market, insofar covered by the travel rule. This is a transaction where there is a possibility 
of control, as a covered entity is involved. However, this is a form of control that was not 
envisioned when the travel rule was first established.  
The main question the legislature had to deal with is, hence, whether and up to what extent should 
travel rule requirements be applied in such on -sided transactions. Most importantly, should the 
verification duty of the CASP extend to the self-hosted counterparty? 
 
133 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk based approach to virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 30.  
134 To underline such a difference is also, European Banking Authority, EBA Report on the future of 
AML/CFT Framework in the EU, cit., 40. 
 245 
The answer to this question is the crux of the legislative dilemma created by the travel rule  in the 
field. 
The solution adopted by the FATF, in the above quoted Guidance of 2019, is a conservative one: 
when a transfer is addressed or received by an unhosted wallet, the CASP has to solely identify the 
self-hosted counterparty through a declaration released by its customer.135  This means the CASP 
has no duty to corroborate the truthfulness of the information provided by its customer, but simply 
to ask and record the answer. This is a suboptimal solution in terms of financial flows monitoring 
as, in traditional transactions, data of both the originator and addressee are verified. In contrast, 
when it comes to crypto -assets, the information concerning the self-hosted wallet is solely based 
on a declaration by the CASP’s customer. 
The latest FATF Guidance, published in October 2021, which, for the first time devotes ample 
space to clarifying the application horizons of the travel rule, takes a substantially similar approach 
to its 2019 predecessor.136 At the same time, the Recommendation opens the door to additional, 
more stringent requirements. The Guidance states that, while the general recommendation remains 
unaltered, individual jurisdictions or covered entities may go beyond it , particularly, by providing 
for additional obligations or cautions in the case of transactions with self-hosted wallets. Such 
measures can include: classifying each transaction with a  self-hosted wallet as high-risk, and thus 
subject to more stringent compliance obligations, or even banning transactions with self-hosted 
wallets.137 
 
5.3 The European take on the travel rule. A primer for architectural 
regulation? 
 
135 Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk based approach to virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, 
cit., 30. 
136 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based  approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 65, “The FATF does not expect that VASPs and FIs, when originating a VA transfer, to submit 
the required information to individuals who are not obliged entities. VASPs sending or receiving a VA transfer to/from an 
entity that is not a VASP or other obliged entity (e.g., from an individual VA user to an unhosted wallet), should obtain the 
required originator and beneficiary information from their customer”. 
137 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 87. 
 246 
 
In July 2021, the European Commission presented a proposal for a regulation on the application 
of the travel rule to the crypto -assets market. 138 The proposal amends the general travel rule 
Regulation of 2015.139 
The Commission’s proposal did not mention self-hosted wallets, hence restricting its purview 
solely to CASP-to-CASP transactions. However, the European Parliament pushed, since the start, 
for an extension of the purview of the travel rule also to transactions with self-hosted wallets and, 
in particular, to unilaterally intermediated transactions (CASP-to-self-hosted).140 
To this end, the proposal of the Parliament 141 provided for a CASP’s duty of verification for any 
transaction involving a self-hosted wallet. Under the proposal, the CASP had to verify not only its 
customer’s information but also the data concerning the owner of the self-hosted wallet. The first 
political agreement on the Regulation had mitigated such an obligation by providing, at article 14 
and sixteen, a duty of verification only where the transaction exceed ed one-thousand euros.142 
Under such a threshold the rule applied was the one provided by the FATF: simple identification 
based on the information provided by the customer. 
 
138 Proposal for a Regulation of the European Union, 20th July 2021, n. 0241. 
139 Regulation of the European Union, 20 th May 2015, n. 847; A. Minto, Riflessioni sull’applicabilità della 
disciplina antiriciclaggio ai Non-Fungible Tokens (“NFT”), cit., 34. 
140 European Parliament, Report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on 
information accompanying transfers of funds and certain crypto-assets, 6th of April 2022, Rapporteurs: Ernest Urtasun, 
Assita Kanko. 
141 See European Parliament, Report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on 
information accompanying transfers of funds and certain crypto -assets, cit., art. 14 para. 5b, “ in the case of a transfer of 
crypto-assets made to an unhosted wallet, the provider of crypto -asset transfers of the originator shall collect and retain the 
information referred to paragraphs 1 and 2, including from its customer, verify the accuracy of tha t information in accordance 
with paragraph 5 of this Article and Article 16(2), make such information available to competent authorities upon request, 
and ensure that the transfer of crypto- assets can be individually identified”, ed art. 16 co. 4a, also see, recital 29a “The 
provider of crypto-asset transfers should verify the accuracy of information with respect to the originator or beneficiary behind 
the unhosted wallet, and ensure that the transfer of crypto-assets can be individually identified”. 
142 European Parliament, Provisional Agreement resulting from interinstitutional negotiations on Proposal for a regulation 
of the European Parliament and of the Council on information accompanying transfers of funds and certain crypto-assets, cit., 
see also recital 29b, “In case of a transfer to or from a self-hosted address, the crypto-asset service provider should collect the 
information on both the originator and the beneficiary, usually from their customer. The crypto-asset service provider should in 
principle not be required to verify the information on the user of the self-hosted address. Nonetheless, in case of a transfer whose 
amount exceeds EUR 1 000 and is sent or received on behalf of a customer of a crypto-asset service provider to or from a self-
hosted address, that crypto-asset service provider should verify whether such self-hosted address is effectively owned or controlled 
by that customer”. 
 247 
The interesting aspect of this extension is that it changes the nature of Recommendation 16 in a 
way that directly affects the conformation of the market and the technology itself. Indeed, 
Recommendation 16, in the traditional market, is intended to require intermediaries to include in 
a wire transfer information they should already possess because of the Know Your Customer they 
performed during the onboarding phase. In contrast, in the crypto sphere, the travel rule creates a 
new profiling obligation extended to a party who has no prior relationship with the covered entity 
– i.e., the owner of the self-hosted wallet. A profiling obligation which would have to be pursued 
by carrying out a new Know Your Customer of the counterparty. 
This regulatory approach generates a significant discrimination between intermediated and self-
hosted wallets. Significantly, to transact with a self-hosted wallet, an intermediary will incur in 
higher compliance costs than when transacting with another intermediated wallet. This generates 
a risk of triggering a de-risking phenomenon by intermediaries.143 At the same time, the holder of 
a self-hosted wallet, to transact with an intermediated wallet, will be forced to de-anonymize their 
account suffering a much greater compression of their confidentiality than when transacting with 
another self-hosted wallet. 
The discrimination in question is of particular interest because it represents a (more or less 
conscious) attempt by the legislator to influence the conformation of the market so to favour its 
legislative goals. Significantly, through the legislation in question, the legislator makes transactions 
through self-hosted wallets more resource intensive (for intermediaries) and less private (for 
individuals). The change imparted by the legislation is all the more relevant whe n one considers 
that this goes against the fundamental innovation of blockchain: the possibility of exchanging value 
online without the need to use an intermediary. 
The approach of the European legislature in this pending proposal poses two main problems.  
The first problem is that the legislation risks fracturing the crypto market into two mutually 
segregated sectors, with interactions becoming burdensome and intrusive for the disintermediated 
side, and costly, for the intermediated side. On the other hand, while one understands the reasons 
why the legislator would want to push the crypto -market towards increasing intermediation, the 
 
143 For the meaning of de-risking and its impact see Section 2.1 of the present Chapter. 
 248 
risk in doing so is to thwart the innovative core of crypto-assets,144 which, in large part, lies precisely 
in the ability to exchange value digitally in a disintermediated fashion. 
A second problem posed by this approach is the disproportionate impact of such an obligation on 
individual privacy. The entire privacy structure of crypto -assets is based on pseudonymity.145 The 
pseudonymity is rooted in the fact that the user's account – its public key – provides no 
information about the identity of the individual behind it. If the veil of pseudonymity is torn, the 
individual user is exposed to a level of monitoring far more penetrating than in traditional financial 
transactions.146 Significantly, in the traditional financial system, information is centrally stored by 
each intermediary in private ledgers. Such information is logically fragmented, as each intermediary 
only records the transactions and balances of their own customers nothing knowing about the 
customers of other intermediaries. In contrast, the blockchain ledger is public and accessible to 
anyone. Moreover, the connected information is logically centralized as each transaction carried 
out through a crypto -asset is recorded consequentially in a single ledger. This implies that, once 
the public key is de-anonymized, anyone can analyse and monitor the financial activity of a given 
individual, thus, accessing highly sensitive data. In this sense, forcing the owner of a self-hosted 
wallet to identify themselves poses a significant privacy problem, as it obliges them, for the sole 
purpose of performing a transaction, to disclose their entire financial history to the counterparty’s 
CASP.147 
These technical notations would have made the concrete implementations of such a legislative 
solution problematic. The European co -legislator, hence, ultimately reached a kind of middle 
ground solution. This solution is the topic of the next section. 
 
144 The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 95, “attempts to force the regulatory 
model on decentralised and peer -to-peer transactions will broadly sweep in innocent conduct and hamper innovation in this 
space”. 
145 For more on crypto-assets’ privacy structure see chapter two section six. 
146 For a further reflection on the connection between privacy, blockchain transparency, and anti-money 
laundering monitoring see section 6.3. 
147 See the dissenting opinion  to the proposal as approved by the Parliament of MEP Gunnar Beck 
according to whom “By going beyond the FATF rules, crypto users with private, self-controlled wallets will be discriminated 
against and treated differently than people with cash. Every single transaction is potentially “travel rule eligible” and wou ld 
have to be reported. Th is is a blatant violation of data protection law and is reminiscent of the behaviour of totalitarian 
surveillance states”, see European Parliament, Report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and 
of the Council on information accompanying transfers of funds and certain crypto -assets, cit.; see also The law society, 
Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 95. 
 249 
 
5.4 The final text. Postpone, postpone, postpone? 
 
The final text of the Regulation, published in May 2023,148 reached a somewhat confusing middle 
ground.  
Eminently, article 3, paragraph 10, clarifies that the requirements of the Regulation apply to all 
transfers of funds including to or from self -hosted addresses. However, the extension is not 
complete. For transfers under one-thousand euros the FATF’s rule applies: CASPs must solely 
identify the counterpart’s information based on the customer’s declaration. For transfers that 
exceed such a threshold , the Regulation requires CASPs to take adequate measures to assess 
whether the self-hosted address is owned or controlled by the originator.  
This is a confusing solution from an interpretative perspective. Eminently, it remains unclear 
whether it should be read as a prohibition of all transactions to self -hosted addresses above the 
threshold not controlled by the customer or as a restriction of the verification duty only to such 
transactions. What is confusing is that, if the second interpretation is correct, it is unclear why 
increased compliance duties ha ve been placed on transactions between the customer and their 
wallets and not on all trans actions with self-hosted wallets. Truly, there is no reason to consider 
the first riskier compared to the second. Furthermore, the concept of “adequate measures” is not 
further specified. It is unclear whether this overlaps with verification procedures or it is a more 
flexible concept to be applied on a case-by-case basis by the covered entity.  
It can be argued that the reason for such a choice is solving the problem by dodging it. Eminently, 
the problems analysed in the previous section are strongly reduced if the verification duty is 
restricted to transactions with self -hosted addresses owned by the customer. In terms of 
compliance costs, the increase for the covered entity is minimal: the CASP does not have to verify 
the information provided by a third party as the account is owned by its customer whose identity 
has already been verified . From the customer’s perspective, the privacy restriction is present but 
 
148 Regulation of the European Union, 31sr May 2023, n. 1113. 
 250 
less relevant as the customer is already using a centralized service provider and, hence, accepts a 
certain level of monitoring from the latter.  
This explication seems to be confirmed by the rest of the Regulation. Eminently, the text partially 
delegates the overall problem connected with self-hosted addresses to supervisors and supervised 
and partially postpones it (as MiCaR with regards to DAOs and NFTs).  
In the first sense, article 19b states that: 
“Member States shall require crypto-asset service providers to identify and assess the risk of money laundering and 
terrorist financing associated with transfers of crypto-assets directed to or originating from a self-hosted address. To 
that end, crypto-asset service providers shall have in place internal policies, procedures and controls. Member States 
shall require crypto-asset service providers to apply mitigating measures commensurate with the risks identified”. 
These include “taking risk-based measures to identify, and verify the identity of, the originator or beneficiary of a 
transfer made to or from a self-hosted address or the beneficial owner of such originator or beneficiary”. This risk-
based measure replicates the Parliament’s proposal simply shifting it  from overall regulation to 
concrete guidelines.  
However, this guidance to National authorities seems to be at odds with the overarching policy 
goal of the sectorial Union’s regulation: provide for a level playing field across the bloc. Eminently, 
certain Member States may implement such guidance as a ma ndatory verification requirement 
while others may not. This would fracture the common market as a covered entity would be 
mandated to verify the information depending on the Member State where the transaction is being 
carried out. Furthermore, such an uneven approach raises the question of how the covered entity 
should ascertain where the transaction is being carried out. Eminently, if the general rule is simple 
identification, how can the covered entity be sure what is the location of the self -hosted wallet’s 
owner? The customer may simply lie and identify its counterparty as belonging to a Member State 
where mandatory verification is not required.  
In the second sense, article 37, requires the Commission, by June 2027, to issue a report assessing 
the risks posed by transfers to or from self -hosted addresses as well as the need for specific 
 251 
measures to mitigate those risks, and propose, if appropriate, amendments to the Regulation. This 
way the legislature postpones addressing, at a regulatory level, the most concerning issues.149 
It will, then, be up to the Commission and supervisory authorities to evaluate the impact of the 
exclusion spelled out by the co -legislators and decide on an extension of the travel rule beyond 
hosted wallets. 
 
6. Blockchain analytics and compliance. A new tool for anti -money 
laundering? 
 
The last section of the present chapter is devoted  to a compliance trend rooted in the specific 
characteristics of blockchain’s data structure: blockchain analysis. Before delving into the concrete 
functioning of such a technique, the present section details the overarching themes and regulatory 
trends such a technique has spurred. Section six-one will, then, detail the functioning and logic of 
blockchain analytics tools. Section six -two will reflect on the impact such a technique may have 
on the future regulatory strategy. Finally, section six-three will briefly examine the impact of such 
techniques on the privacy regulation.  
As detailed  throughout the thesis,  blockchain modifies the way financial data is stored  and 
managed. With blockchain, data transitions from private, fragmented ledgers to public, logically 
unified ones.150 The shift entails a reduction in the role of financial institutions and, in general, 
intermediaries. Intermediaries lose control of the financial ledger of which they simply become a 
(possible) node. The entry and exit points to the ledger are no longer under the sole control of an 
intermediary as the same is decentralized both in terms of access and governance.  
 
149 This approach of dodging the most contentious issues and postponing them to a later date seems to 
characterize the whole sectorial regulation. Eminently, the MiCaR takes the same approach when it comes 
to the regulation of Decentralized Autonomous Organiz ations and Non -fungible Tokens, where the 
decision concerning their inclusion is deferred to a later date. 
150 TRM Labs, Compliance in the second age of digital assets: How crypto compliance programs are evolving in 2023, cit., 
5. 
 252 
If this shift reduces the role of intermediaries as necessary che ckpoints of the system, it also 
changes the accessibility and traceability of financial data.151 Blockchain data is, by-design, public152 
as there is no more a gatekeeper that owns and stores the ledger. At the same time, the presence 
of a single ledger for the whole network means the information is logically unified. Private ledgers 
only store partial information – i.e., the transactions carried out with a certain intermediary. In 
contrast, blockchain ledgers store all transactions carried out with a crypto-asset in a consecutive 
fashion. Furthermore, such information is unmodifiable. Transactions can be analysed and traced 
irrespective of their date and any data retention policies.153 
These characteristics of blockchain have spurred the development of a partially new compliance 
method: blockchain analysis. The public nature of the ledger means anyone can analyse it. Criminal 
activity carried out through crypto -assets is visible, even though not always apparent,  to anyone. 
The unified nature of the ledger enhances the effectiveness of such an analysis. In traditional 
systems, a criminal could simply use different intermediaries to obfuscate its money trail. It would 
then be up to investigators to gain access to each ledger and piece together the money trail. With 
blockchain, the money trail can be followed ad infinitum as long as a certain crypto-asset is used.154 
Additionally, there is no need to request for access as the ledger is readily available.  
This compliance technique is only partially new. Covered entities already employ and are mandated 
to carry out – as we have seen in the section o n Customer Due Diligence 155 – transaction 
monitoring on their customer’s activities. However, with blockchain, such monitoring is 
 
151 C. Rueckert, Cryptocurrencies and fundamental rights, cit., 3. 
152 A. Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, taxonomy and open challenges , cit., 1; N. 
Tovanich – R. Cazabet, Pattern Analysis of Money Flows in the Bitcoin Blockchain in Complex Networks and Their 
Applications in XI: Proceedings of The Eleventh International Conference on Complex Networks and Their Applications: 
COMPLEX NETWORKS 2022, 1, 2023, 1; here we refer again to permissionless networks as permissioned 
one have a different data structure. World Economic Forum, Pathways to the Regulation of Crypto -Assets: A 
Global Approach, cit., 3 
153 A. Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, taxonomy and open challenges , cit., 5; 
European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document Accompanying the document Report from the Commission 
to the European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of the risk of money laundering and terrorist financing affecting 
the internal market and relating to cross-border activities, cit., 14. 
154 A. Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, taxonomy and open challenges , cit., 5; it has 
still to be underlined that such a characteristic of blockchain only applies to transaction that are carries out 
with one coin. If the individual changes its coin the transaction trail gets fragmented and loses its 
consequentiality. On the characteristics and effectiveness of this money laundering tactic , also known as 
“chain hopping”, see A. Moiseienko – O. Kraft, From money mules to chain hopping. Targeting the finances of 
cybercrime, cit., 40 – 41; O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory 
response?, cit., 26. 
155 See Section 2.2 of this Chapter. 
 253 
significantly expanded in two sense s. First, the covered entity can analyse all the transactions 
carried out by their customer, whereas in centralized ledgers they can only consider transactions 
executed with their systems. Second, anyone can conduct such an analysis. Whereas, in centralized 
systems, the analysis can only be performed by the owner of the ledger. With blockchain anyone 
– including Law Enforcement Authorities, supervisors, NGOs, and academics – can analyse 
blockchain transactions directly.156  
As noted by Verduyn157  “The paradox of blockchain technology is therefore that while AML efforts must deal 
with imperfect knowledge of identities, they may exploit perfect knowledge of all transactions”.158 Based on these 
characteristics of blockchain, several companies have started offering blockchain analytics tools,159 
examples being Elliptic,160 Chainalysis,161 or TRM Labs.162 Such tools allow to perform a wide range 
of analytics activities on blockchain ledgers, from simple tracing to more complex analysis aimed 
at identifying patterns or clusters of connected accounts/transactions.163 
The use of blockchain analytics tools, hence, has a direct impact on how covered entities and States 
approach compliance. For companies, it extends their ability to assess customer risk by analysing 
transactions not carried out with in their systems. 164 For States it changes the way they exert 
supervision. Blockchain accessibility opens a new regulatory avenue: direct monitoring of financial 
data by the supervisor. The public nature of the ledger disintermediates the relation ship between 
supervisor and information bypassing the need to rely on intermediaries for monitoring.165 
 
156 D. Carlisle, Virtual currencies and financial crime: Challenges and opportunities, cit., viii. 
157 M. Campbell-Verduyn, Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global anti-money laundering governance, cit., 298. 
158 On a similar note, A. Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, taxonomy and open 
challenges, cit., 2, “ As cryptocurrencies rely on cryptographic protection and a decentralised peer -to-peer system, money 
ownership is implicitly pseudonymous, while its flow is publicly available and visible”. 
159 Together with private analytics tools there is also a wide range of free analytics tools that can be accessed 
and used. 
160 https://www.elliptic.co/. 
161 https://www.chainalysis.com/. 
162 https://www.trmlabs.com/. 
163 For more on the functioning and logic underlying these tools see the next section of the present chapter. 
A. Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, taxonomy and open challenges , cit., 3; The law 
society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 91, for more on these techniques see the 
next section; C. Pelker Alden – C. Brown – R. Tucker, Using Blockchain Analysis from Investigation to Trial, cit., 
62. 
164 M. Harlev, et al., Breaking bad: De-anonymising entity types on the bitcoin blockchain using supervised machine learning, 
cit., 3505. 
165 TRM Labs, Compliance in the second age of digital assets: How crypto compliance programs are evolving in 2023, cit., 
5. 
 254 
This architectural change, and its impact, ha ve been underlined  by regulators worldwide. The 
European Commission, the FATF, the US Department of Treasury, and the World Economic 
Forum have all directed covered entities and supervisors to employ analytics tools as a risk 
mitigation strategy. 166 Consequently, supervisors, police and intelligence agencies 167 as well as 
covered entities have started using such tools extensively.168 
Particularly, blockchain analytics impacts both dimensions of anti-money laundering compliance:  
the supervisory and the compliance one. This duplicity is underlined by the Financial Action Task 
Force in its Guidance of 2021: 
“A number of jurisdictions are using, or exploring using, blockchain analytics services to assist with their 
supervision. The services can be used in a number of ways, including to pinpoint areas that supervisors may wish to 
focus on during assessments of individual VASPs and helping to categorise the highest risk VASPs based on 
their activity. There is a cost consideration with these tools and not all VAs are covered by all vendors. Blockchain 
analytics are also widely used by VASPs and some FIs to monitor their own exposure to risk (e.g., VA transfers 
that have passed through mixer services or come from privacy wallets)".169 
The FATF, hence, identifies two main dimensions of blockchain analytics impact. 
 
166 European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document Accompanying the document Report from the 
Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of the risk of money laundering and terrorist 
financing affecting the internal market and relating to cross-border activities, cit., 102, “We note, however, that crypto-assets 
transactions conducted on public distributed ledgers leave immutable traces and are there for everyone to see. Persons engagi ng 
in ML/TF via such crypto asset transactions expose themselves to public scrutiny of their transactions. Europol should consider 
using blockchain analysis tools in order to analyse addresses and transactions for critical information such as geolocation d ata 
or the cryptocurrency exchange (used to purchase the coins)”; US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment 
of Decentralized Finance, cit., 3; World Economic Forum, Pathways to the Regulation of Crypto -Assets: A Global 
Approach, cit., 33; Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and 
Virtual Asset Service Providers, cit., 36, “ A number of jurisdictions are using, or exploring using, blockchain analytics 
services to assist with their supervision. The services can be used in a number of ways, including to pinpoint areas that supervisors 
may wish to focus on during assessments of i ndividual VASPs and helping to categorise the highest risk VASPs based on 
their activity. There is a cost consideration with these tools and not all VAs are covered by all vendors. Blockchain analyti cs 
are also widely used by VASPs and some FIs to monitor their own exposure to risk (e.g., VA transfers that have passed 
through mixer services or come from privacy wallets). It is important to consider any potential implications for privacy and data 
protection in the use of such tools, if they allow transparency that is not otherwise available (e.g., on public blockchains)”; The 
law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 91. 
167 A. Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, taxonomy and open challenges, cit., 1. 
168 I. Karasek -Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering instruments and European data protection 
requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces, cit., 3. 
169 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 71. 
 255 
First, at a supervisory level, the analytics tools can be used to perform the risk-assessment function 
and the supervisory one.170 In the first sense, through blockchain analytics, supervisors can assess 
the composition of the market, evaluate the level of penetration of crypto-assets in their economy, 
hence, decide how to allocate resources. They can also use it to identify parts of  the market that 
are of particular concern – for instance , an extensive  use of self -hosted addresses, privacy -
enhancing tools, frequent contact with DeFi  arrangements, or with CASPs located in high -risk 
jurisdictions – and intensify controls accordingly. In the second sense, they can use it to monitor 
the activity of a single CASP and supervise  it in a manner  non-intrusive for the covered entity . 
Furthermore, when conducting a review of the CASP’s activity they can integrate the information 
provided by the latter with the open-source information bore by blockchain to verify it.171 
Second, at a covered entity level, the tools can be used to better assess the customer risk  and 
monitor its activity.172 The covered entity can use the information provided by the blockchain to 
assess their customer’s activity and enrich the Know Your Customer and transaction monitoring 
function. Explicitly mentioned elements of relevance in such an assessment are the interaction of 
the customer with mixers or other privacy-enhancing tools as well as self-hosted wallets.  
At the Union level, this double dimension of blockchain analytics is equally reflected.  
At a policy level, while the Fifth Directive did not mention such tools, references to it are made in 
the newly introduced legislations. Particularly, the Travel Rule Regulation, at article 37, paragraph 
3, letter b), directs the Commission to draft: 
“an assessment of the technological solutions for complying with the obligations imposed on crypto-asset service 
providers under this Regulation, including of the latest development of technologically sound and interoperable 
solutions for complying with this Regulation and of the use of DLT analytic tools for identifying the origin and 
destination of transfers of crypto-assets and for performing a ‘know your transaction’ (KYT) assessment”. 
At the same time, recital 17 directs the EBA to  
 
170 TRM Labs, Compliance in the second age of digital assets: How crypto compliance programs are evolving in 2023, cit., 
5. 
171 TRM Labs, Compliance in the second age of digital assets: How crypto compliance programs are evolving in 2023, cit., 
5. 
172 US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 12, “ Blockchain 
analytics can also be a useful tool for the private sector to provide information on risk, support a risk -based approach to 
compliance, and review customer activity at onboarding and on a periodic or event-triggered basis”. 
 256 
“issue guidelines specifying the enhanced due diligence measures that obliged entities should consider applying to 
mitigate such risks, including the adoption of appropriate procedures such as the use of distributed ledger technology 
(DLT) analytic tools, to detect the origin or destination of crypto-assets”. 
Such references are not reiterated in the AML Package . However, their inclusion in the Travel 
Rule Regulation (the latest anti-money laundering policy to be approved) point s in the direction 
of an inclusion in the final texts of the legislations composing the Package to be adopted in 2024, 
currently under the evaluation of the co-legislators.  
The attention towards blockchain analytics tools is confirmed  at the supervisory level  by the, 
abovementioned, European Banking Authority’s draft guideline.173 The draft explicitly mentions 
these tools in several parts. At a general level, guideline 4 on transaction monitoring directs covered 
entities to evaluate: 
“whether the use of advanced analytics tools, like the distributed ledger analytics tools, is necessary in light of the 
ML/TF risk associated with the firm’s business, and with the firm’s customers’ individual transactions”.174 
In a similar way the Sectorial Guidelines directs covered entities to apply: 
“advanced analytics tools to assess the risk of transactions, particularly for transactions involving self-hosted 
addresses. Based on the nature of the CASP, it might be sufficient to apply advanced analytics tools to 
transactions on a risk-sensitive basis, as a supplement to the standard transaction monitoring tools. Such tools are 
crucial to trace the history of transactions, individual coins and to identify links with criminal activities, persons or 
entities”.175 
 
173 European Banking Authority, Consultation Paper Guidelines amending Guidelines EBA/2021/02 on customer 
due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions should consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist 
financing risk associated with individual business r elationships and occasional transactions (‘The ML/TF Risk Factors 
Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/849, cit. 
174 European Banking Authority, Consultation Paper Guidelines amending Guidelines EBA/2021/02 on customer 
due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions should consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist 
financing risk associated with individual business r elationships and occasional transactions (‘The ML/TF Risk Factors 
Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/849, cit., 17. 
175 European Banking Authority, Consultation Paper Guidelines amending Guidelines EBA/2021/02 on customer 
due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions should consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist 
financing risk associated with individual business r elationships and occasional transactions (‘The ML/TF Risk Factors 
Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/849, cit., 32. 
 257 
Furthermore, among the risk mitigation measures that can be implemented as part of the 
Enhanced Due Diligence the draft includes: 
“assess more frequently or in more depth the activities performed through the crypto asset accounts used by the 
customer by using a crypto investigation tool (EDD risk mitigation Measure)”. 
This promotion of blockchain analytics techniques is also connected with the increasing wariness 
towards anonymity-enhancing technologies that stand in the way precisely of this type of analysis. 
The EBA classifies privacy -enhancing technologies – as privacy wallets, mixers, etc. – as factors 
that heighten the money laundering risk and warrant a closer examination by the covered entity. 
In a similar fashion, the FATF’s Guidance of 2021 requires: 
“VASPs licensed by or operating in their jurisdiction can manage and mitigate the risks of engaging in activities 
that involve the use of anonymity-enhancing technologies or mechanisms, including but not limited to AECs, 
mixers, tumblers, privacy wallets and other technologies that obfuscate the identity of the sender, recipient, holder, 
or beneficial owner of a VA. If the VASP cannot manage and mitigate the risks posed by engaging in such 
activities, then the VASP should not be permitted to engage in such activities”.176 
To sum up, the use of blockchain analytics tools constitute s one of the latest trends in the anti-
money laundering regulation of crypto -assets. Both the FATF, in its Guidance of 2021, and the 
Union in its most recent regulation and guidance underline their value as a tool for both 
supervisors and covered entities.  At the same time, the use of blockchain analytics is promoted 
through the identification of all services that blur the transaction trail as high-risk or, even, barred. 
We will return to this point in section seven-three on the clash between privacy and anti -money 
laundering regulation. 
Notwithstanding its usefulness, blockchain analysis is certainly not a magic tool. The pseudonymity 
of crypto-assets entails that, while illicit or suspect transactions can be identified, it may still be 
exceedingly hard to identify the individuals behind such transactions – i.e., deanonymize accounts. 
This means that, in the absence o f any instrument that allows to freeze a suspect’s transaction, 
simple transaction monitoring may be a passive exercise.177 Furthermore, criminals can use an array 
 
176 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 55. 
177 As underlined by A. Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, taxonomy and open 
challenges, cit., 5, “ once information is published, it is nearly impossible to remove it ”; World Economic Forum, 
 258 
of techniques to blur the transaction trail. Mixers, Privacy Coins, 178 chain hopping can all be 
employed to diminish the usefulness and transparency of blockchain data. 179 Finally, blockchain 
analytics techniques are still in a nascent stage. Their reliability – especially when complex 
transactions are involved, as in the case of mixers – is discussed.180 Particularly, while their use for 
investigative purposes – including to establish probable cause for invasive investigative measures181 
– seems to be widely recognized, their admissibility as evidence is all but clear.  
In this sense, the use of analytics tools should be carefully evaluated by covered entities especially 
when making business decisions affecting individual rights. The novelty of the techniques and the 
connected limitations should warrant special caution . Particularly, a special attention should be 
paid to the use of such techniques when deciphering transaction patterns involving privacy -
enhancing services, as mixers. A good practice would be to always use corroborating information 
and evidence besides blockchain analytics results when taking decisions that impact individual 
rights, as account freeze or discontinuation of the business relation.  In this sense, the result of 
blockchain analytics shall be seen as an element of suspicion to, then, be integrated through further 
external indexes. 
Before we conclude, a final point has to be drawn. The development and diffusion of blockchain 
analytics as a compliance method, leads us back to the argument made in the previous chapter: 
decentralized governance warrants for a customized policy framework. Eminently, not all virtual 
assets or crypto-assets under the FATF and MiCaR definition share the outlined data management 
structure.  
The mentioned fundamental innovation, and connected risks, in the data structure only appl y to 
public, permissionless blockchains. This means  blockchains wh ose governance structure is 
decentralized so that no central point of governance exists. It is only in this type of networks that 
 
Decentralized Finance (DeFi) Policymaker Toolkit , cit., 7; US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk 
Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 12. 
178 D. Carlisle, Virtual currencies and financial crime: Challenges and opportunities, cit., 38. 
179 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 26; as 
mentioned by I. Karasek -Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering instruments and European data 
protection requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces, cit., 4, Monero a privacy coin has proven to be “currently 
resistant to tracking and tracing methods that applied to other cryptocurrencies ”; US Department of Treasury, Illicit 
Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 12 
180 European Banking Authority, Opinion of the European Banking Authority on money laundering and terrorist 
financing risks affecting the EU’s financial sector, cit., 96. 
181 US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 12 
 259 
the ledger is public. Private, permissioned DLTs, while replicating a ledger among various nodes, 
do not change the way ledgers are stored and updated. Furthermore, such ledgers do permit 
control of entry and exit points (hence identification) and centralized establishment of rules (e.g., 
the exclusion of mixing services).  
To draft rules that police the use of blockchain analytics, centralized and decentralized crypto -
assets cannot be put in the same basket. The fundamental innovations, and risks, connected with 
blockchain analytics need to be assessed with fully decentralized networks in mind.182 Eminently, 
given the intrusive and pervasive use in crypto -compliance a clear legal basis should be provided. 
The use of such tools goes beyond the information usually processed and analysed by covered 
entities and supervisors, hence, a clear legal basis should be provided. However, to do so the 
abovementioned distinction has to be reinstated at the legislative level.  
An example can easily clarify the distinction. As said, blockchain analytics paves the way for direct 
supervision by states’ authorities of financial transactions. However, this only applies to ledgers 
that, due to their decentralized governance, are publi c. A permissioned blockchain, or any other 
type of private DLT, is not necessarily public. The publicity of the ledger – as we have detailed in 
chapter two – is a technological necessity connected with the  decentralized governance  of the 
network. In a cent rally governed network, there is no architectural need for a public ledger. In 
contrast, such ledgers are usually private as the centralized governance body has no interest in 
sharing valuable data with its competitors. This means that, in terms of archivi ng infrastructure, 
centrally governed DLTs do not generate new opportunities for ledger analytics. The same goes 
for blacklisting. In a centrally governed network, there is no need for blacklisting. As the update 
of the ledger is centralized, the centre of governance can simply unilaterally block or reverse a 
tainted transaction.  
In conclusion, the establishment and regulation of customized methods for compliance, as is the 
case with blockchain analytics, requires a clear distinction between centralized and decentralized 
tokens. This distinction should be kept in mind when analysing the remainder of this section, as 
the following arguments only apply to public, permissionless networks. 
 
182 See for a similar distinction, although from a data protection perspective, M. Finck, Blockchains and data 
protection in the European Union, cit., 18. 
 260 
 
6.1 Blockchain analysis tools: tracing, clustering, and pattern analysis 
 
Before delving into the larger policy implications of blockchain analytics, it is appropriate to briefly 
sketch its functioning.  Blockchain analytics  is an umbrella term that comprises a series of 
techniques. Such techniques differ widely in terms of complexity and potential.  
The most basic technique that can be employed is tracing. Tracing simply entails following a certain 
account’s activity across the ledger. This technique can be pursued through public, free blockchain 
explorers183 or services provided by specialized companies.184 The effectiveness of this method is, 
however, limited. Eminently, a minimally careful user can simply employ multiple addresses to 
avoid traceability. 185 The creation of new addresses is free and easy and does not require any 
identification.186 Potentially a different address could be used for each single transaction without 
any relevant increase in costs. 
To solve this weakness more advanced analytics techniques have been devised. Particularly, 
clustering allows bundling of addresses and/or transactions connected to a single user. 187 This 
allows to neutralize , or at least reduce,  the effectiveness of employing multiple accounts. 
Furthermore, cluster analysis can be used to mitigate the effectiveness of anonymity -enhancing 
techniques, such as the use of mixers.  
 
183 These types of software are free and available online, they allow to search for a public key, transaction, 
and block to obtain basic information. See, for example, the service offered by blockchain.com at 
https://www.blockchain.com/explorer or Blockstream at https://blockstream.info/.  
184 For a review of such tools both private and open source see A. Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools 
for blockchain: Review, taxonomy and open challenges, cit., 3. 
185 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response? , cit., 26; 
M. Harlev, et al., Breaking bad: De-anonymising entity types on the bitcoin blockchain using supervised machine learning , 
cit., 3499; I. Karasek-Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti-money laundering instruments and European data protection 
requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces, cit., 12. 
186 For address creation see chapter 2 section 5. 
187 M. Harlev, et al., Breaking bad: De-anonymising entity types on the bitcoin blockchain using supervised machine learning, 
cit., 3500.  
 261 
The techniques used to cluster transactions are rooted in various heuristics. Let’s analyse a couple 
of them to better understand their functioning.188 
First, multi-input heuristic.189 Multi-input clustering aims at connecting a group of addresses to a 
single entity. This is done by searching for multi -input transactions (meaning transactions where 
multiple addresses are used for a single transaction). The addresses can then be clustered as 
associated with one entity. 190 The basic idea being that, if two addresses are used for a single 
transaction, then both are controlled by the same entity. The investigator can then scan the 
blockchain to find other multi -input transactions where at least one of the clustered addresses is 
involved and enlarge the connected cluster.   
Second, shadow heuristic. This heuristic is based on the concept of Unspent Transaction Output 
(UTXO). In short, a UTXO ca n be described as the change of a crypto -transaction.191 As with a 
cash payment where a high -value banknote is used, in specific cases crypto -transactions result in 
change. In such cases, the transaction has two outputs. One output is the receiving address, and 
the other address is held by the sender.192 If the investigator can understand which one of the two 
outputs is the UTXO, then they can cluster such address with the sending address. 
The third macro-category of blockchain analytics techniques is pattern analysis.193 Pattern analysis 
enables a different form of control compared to the previous two. Tracing and clustering always 
start from a certain address or transaction. In this sense, these techniques always require 
information to trigger the analysis: either a cust omer’s or suspect ’s account or a transaction 
identified as connected to criminal activity. Pattern analysis inverts this process. Such types of 
 
188 For other examples see M. Harlev, et al., Breaking bad: De-anonymising entity types on the bitcoin blockchain using 
supervised machine learning, cit., 3500. 
189 M. Harlev, et al., Breaking bad: De-anonymising entity types on the bitcoin blockchain using supervised machine learning, 
cit., 3500, refers to it as co-spend clustering. 
190 J. Hirshman – Y. Huang – S. Macke, Unsupervised approaches to detecting anomalous behavior in the bitcoin 
transaction network, cit., 1, “two public keys may be assumed to belong to the same entity if they both appear as inputs to a 
particular transaction, since this means that whoever authorized the transaction had access to both corresponding private keys”; 
C. Pelker Alden – C. Brown – R. Tucker, Using Blockchain Analysis from Investigation to Trial, cit., 62 “common 
protocol for cluster analysis is linking together all the input addresses for one transaction. That is, if two or more addresses are 
inputs of the same transaction with one output, then one can infer that those input addresses are controlled by the same user”. 
N. Tovanich – R. Cazabet, Pattern Analysis of Money Flows in the Bitcoin Blockchain, cit., 4. 
191 A. Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, taxonomy and open challenges, cit., 2. 
192 N. Tovanich – R. Cazabet, Pattern Analysis of Money Flows in the Bitcoin Blockchain, cit., 2. 
193 See, among the others, the work by J. Hirshman – Y. Huang – S. Macke, Unsupervised approaches to detecting 
anomalous behavior in the bitcoin transaction network, cit.; M. Harlev, et al., Breaking bad: De-anonymising entity types 
on the bitcoin blockchain using supervised machine learning , cit.; C. Berggren – J. Asplund, Identifying and analyzing 
digital payment flows regarding illegal purposes on the Internet: I samarbete med CGI OCH Finanskoalitionen, 2016. 
 262 
software scan the blockchain and identify patterns of transactions that, according to their heuristic, 
are suspicious. Pattern analysis enables, hence, a more proactive form of supervision  or 
monitoring. The supervisor and/or covered entity does not need a trigger to launch its 
investigation but can harvest the information directly from the ledger. 
This software use pattern analysis heuristics, including through the use of artificial intelligence, 194 
to identify red flags. When a certain number of red flags connected with a transaction or a chain 
of transactions are identified, the software reports it to a human analyst for assessment. Examples 
of such red flags being, for instance, the use of mixers, interaction with accounts connected with 
known criminal activity, and use of CASPs located in high-risk jurisdictions.  
Pattern analysis can also be employed reactively. Meaning, the activity of a specific user or suspect 
can be monitored through pattern analysis to spot suspicious or risky transactions. Similarly, when 
evaluating the risk of a transaction, a covered entity can analyse the connected pattern of 
transactions to evaluate its risk.  
The last of the macro -techniques is at the frontier between blockchain analytics and classic 
computer forensics: address deanonymization. The deanonymization of blockchain addresses is a 
key step for the prosecution and apprehension of cybercriminals.195 Deanonymization techniques 
use external data – as IP addresses, and information posted online196 – to connect an individual 
with a certain account/s.197 Deanonymization is also linked with clustering techniques. The use of 
clustering can be used to enhance the probability of deanonymization. Eminently, through 
clustering, investigators and compliance officers can identify a group of addresses connected with 
a single entity. This, in turn, multiplies the possible point of failure : the attacker only needs to 
deanonymize one of the addresses in the cluster to identify the individual/s controlling them.  
 
194 See “Blockchain Inspector” as detailed by A. Balaskas - V. Franqueira, Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, 
taxonomy and open challenges , cit., 3; see also the work by M. Harlev, et al., Breaking bad: De-anonymising entity 
types on the bitcoin blockchain using supervised machine learning , cit., that use machine learning to label cluster of 
transactions as pertaining to certain type of service providers (mixers, exchangers, etc.) or activity 
(ransomware, dark markets, etc.). 
195 C. Rueckert, Cryptocurrencies and fundamental rights, cit., 4. 
196 The manager of the dark market Silk Road, Ross Ulbricht (aka Dread Pirate Roberts), was identified 
through an email address he had used to open an account on a specialized blog where he advertised the 
market.  
197 I. Karasek -Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering instruments and European data protection 
requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces, cit., 3; C. Pelker Alden – C. Brown – R. Tucker, Using Blockchain 
Analysis from Investigation to Trial, cit., 62. 
 263 
The present section has presented the fundamental tools and heuristics underlying blockchain 
analysis. The following sections will briefly reflect on the impact such techniques have on the 
future compliance infrastructure.  
 
6.2 Blockchain analytics. Open questions and f uture regulatory 
avenues 
 
Section six has analysed the current use of blockchain analytics, the present section will delve into 
a possible area of future development. Particularly, if the use of blockchain analytics to ameliorate 
current compliance systems is widely recognized, what seems to still be underexplored is how the 
use of analytics tools could change the overarching anti-money laundering strategy.  
The present strategy was devised with private, intermediated ledgers in mind, a new strategy may 
emerge when public, disintermediated ledgers are introduced. The imposition of significant 
compliance burdens on intermediaries has, so far, been justified based on their exclusive access to 
financial data. The elimination of such a monopoly warrants a re -evaluation regarding the 
rationality and proportionality of such a choice. Compliance duties constitute a relevant burden 
on companies, especially small and medium enterprises. Compliance constitutes a significant limit 
to competition in the field due to substantial start-up costs and consequent barrier of entry to the 
market.198 The limitation imposed on the right to free economic initiative has been currently 
justified rooted in its inevitability: covered entities are the sole guardians of customers’ financial 
data, hence, the only one that can monitor it. In a changing architecture, the validity of such a 
statement should be reconsidered. In this sense, also the proportionality of compliance costs 
should be re-evaluated. Supervisors could take a more active role in detecting suspicious activity 
and cooperating with covered entities. 
Let’s see how this could work. T he current system is rooted in profiling individual customers – 
through Know Your Customer  rules. The covered entity profiles the individual to then identify 
 
198 R. Auer Embedded Supervision: How to build regulation in decentralized finance , cit., 3, “ Compliance expenditure 
weighs heavily on financial institutions, and even more so on smaller firms. Supervisors thus face a trade-off between getting the 
data they need and keeping the costs of compliance within reasonable limits”. 
 264 
suspicious transactions. The information structure of blockchain may warrant an inversion of such 
a paradigm.199 One that starts with identification and profiling of transactions and identifies suspect 
individuals in a second phase – so-called Know Your Transaction. In this sense, the idea of 
Suspicious Activity Report may be inverted. The analysis of the aggregated data, performed directly 
by the supervisor, would reveal anomalies in transaction patterns and address operativity. It would 
be this anomaly to trigger a n (inverted)  SAR that would then warrant an investigation by the 
covered entity into the connected customer. The literature has underlined how the use of SAR s 
based on profiling has frequently proven inefficient. Pushed by the  hefty sanctions imposed in 
case of non-compliance covered entities use SARs as a risk-mitigation strategy. This, in turn, results 
in FIUs being flooded by SARs, sometimes poorly motivated.200  
A transaction -based system would reverse the logic underlying SARs and address this issue . It 
would be the FIU to trigger the investigation of the covered entity, which would then only 
investigate a handful of cases and could devote larger resources to such an activity. The FIU would 
signal to the covered entity a specific operativity that seems suspicious and ask the covered entity 
specific questions to corroborate its suspicions. This system would reduce the problem connected 
with overreporting as suspicious activities would only, or mostly, be the ones identified by FIUs 
and non-compliance would be limited to incorrect answers or lack of effective investigation.  
This second policy strand is not necessarily alternative to the intermediary-centred one. It may also 
become a supplementary tool to better identify suspicious activities. Furthermore, certain profiling 
activities may still be required to the  covered entity so to be prepared when suspicious activities 
were to be signalled by the FIUs. 
If such a paradigm shift is here advocated for crypto-assets, the strategy could expand beyond the 
limits of the crypto -market. Eminently, the proposed introduction of Central Bank Digital 
Currencies (CBDCs) 201 – not classified as crypto -assets – would introduce certain elements of 
 
199 See C. Rueckert, Cryptocurrencies and fundamental rights , cit., 3, “ Due to technological features of cryptocurrencies, 
governments not only have to face obstacles but can also make use of opportuni - ties when regulating them: on the one hand, 
regulation scenarios have to find a solution for the lack of central administrati ve parties. Standard Know -Your-Customer 
(KYC) systems will not work if users do not have to identify themselves when opening an account. Furthermore, the 
pseudonymity of cryptocurrencies hinders any concept that is depended on the knowledge of the users’ i dentity, for example, as 
it is required by law enforcement agencies’ supervision of an individual. On the other hand, the public transaction record enables 
new regulatory approaches”. 
200 See the discussion at section 2.1 of the present chapter. 
201 A CBDC is a form of fiat currency which is issued by the Central Bank in a digital form instead of its 
legacy physical form. For further reflections see IMF Staff, Casting Light on Central Bank Digital Currency, 
 265 
blockchain’s data structure in the larger market. CBDCs are largely rooted in a permissioned 
blockchain controlled by the Central Bank on top of which the intermediaries would operate.202 A 
CBDC would, hence, give full access to financial data to the supervisor. This would, in turn, mean, 
if and when such currencies were to be introduced,203 that the shift from KYC to KYT advocated 
for crypto-assets could be applied to the larger financial market. While this topic is outside of the 
purview of the present dissertation, which focuses on crypto-assets, it certainly provides food for 
thought.  
To conclude, the development and potential of blockchain analysis underlines the dual nature of 
this technology. Certainly, blockchain poses new challenges to crime prevention. As detailed, the 
absence of intermediaries, its transnational nature, and decentralized governance are all factors that 
call into question the pre-existing strategy to financial flows control. At the same time, blockchain’s 
data structure , particularly its publicity (in permissionless networks ) and logical  centralization, 
provide unp recedented opportunities, in terms of data quality and access, to supervisors and 
covered entities. Initially emerged as a passepartout for digital privacy, blockchain, especially in its 
permissioned form, could truly become a tool for greater control of financial flows  and crime 
prevention.204 
 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, 2018; Norges Bank, Central Bank Digital Currencies, 1, 2021, 5; 
D. Legal – G. Ortiz Ibarrola – C. Blanco, Moneda Digital del Banco Central: Implicancias para la estabilidad 
financiera y la politica monetaria en Paraguay, Documentos de Trabajo n. 27 Banco Central del Paraguay, 2022, 
4, S. Allen, et al. Design choices for central bank digital currency: Policy and technical considerations , No. w27634. 
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020. 
202 See, The White House, Technical evaluation for a U.S. Central Bank digital currency system, cit., 11, “ a 
permissionless approach does not make sense for a system that has at least one trusted entity (i.e., the central bank). It is  
possible that the technology underpinning a permissionless approach will improve significantly over time, which might make it  
more suitable to be used in a CBDC system. However, given the state of the technology, most of the analysis that follows 
assumes that there is a central authority and a permissioned CBDC system ”; Norges Bank, Central Bank Digital 
Currencies, cit., 30. 
203 The introduction of CBDCs is still, at least in Western Countries at a study phase. However, the 
European Central Bank has signalled its interest in the introduction of such a token. See the Digital Euro 
Package presented by the Commission the 28 th June 2023, at 
https://finance.ec.europa.eu/publications/digital-euro-package_en, as well as the multiple statements by 
the European bodies, European Central Bank, Eurosystem launches digital euro project , 14 th July 2021, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2021/html/ecb.pr210714~d99198ea23.en.html, European 
Central Bank, Digital Euro Project Timeline , 2021, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/digital_euro/shared/pdf/Digital_euro_project_timeline.en.pdf, 
Eurogroup, statement on the digital euro project , 16 th January 2023, 
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2023/01/16/eurogroup-statement-on-the-
digital-euro-project-16-january-2023/ 
204 A. Gullo, Compliance, cit., 14. These characteristics  of blockchain is in line with other emerging 
technologies arisen during the last decades. Famously, President Clinton dismissed the Chinese efforts of 
 266 
 
6.3 A brief excursus. Blockchain analytics and privacy 
 
Before we close our analysis  on blockchain analytics , a final point has to  be made. The use of 
blockchain analytics generates a specific problem in terms of data protection and privacy. While 
data protection is outside the purview of the present analysis, as its focus is solely the anti-money 
laundering legislation, a brief mention has to be made as a factor that may impact the concrete use 
of these tools.  
It is the same F inancial Action Task Force to underline the trade-off underlying the use of such 
tools: 
“It is important to consider any potential implications for privacy and data protection in the use of such tools, if 
they allow transparency that is not otherwise available (e.g., on public blockchains)”.205 
The use of blockchain data is classifiable as an open-source intelligence (OSINT) analysis. OSINT 
is the macro -area that covers all data analysis performed on publicly available data (as social 
networks, newspapers, academic articles, etc.). 206 The relationship between such techniques and 
data protection has been extensively analysed by the literature.207 Particularly, to be underlined is 
the relation existing between the reasonable expectation of privacy standard, spelled out by the 
 
imposing larger control on the internet as “Nailing Jello to a Wall”, see B. Allen -Ebrahimian, The man who 
nailed the jello to the wall , in Foreign Policy, 29th June 2016, https://foreignpolicy.com/2016/06/29/the-man-
who-nailed-jello-to-the-wall-lu-wei-china-internet-czar-learns-how-to-tame-the-web/. However, the 
internet, initially envisioned as a space that would enable greater freedom and elude state control, has indeed 
largely become a tool for individual and collective monitoring. On the new approach to digital crime 
policing see G. Morgante, Criminal Law and Risk Management: From Tradition to Innovation, cit. 
205 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 71. 
206 B. Koops – H. Jaap-Henk – R. Leenes, Open-source intelligence and privacy by design, in Computer Law & 
Security Review, 6, 2013, 677. 
207 J. Rajamäki – S. Sarlio-Siintola – N. Alapuranen – M. Nevanperä, Privacy and data protection in open source 
intelligence and big data analytics: Case ‘MARISA’  in Ethics as a resource. Examples of RDI projects and educational 
development, 2020; A. Shere, Reading the Investigators their Rights: A review of literature on the General Data Protection 
Regulation and open -source intelligence gathering and analysis , in The New Collection, 3, 2020; B. Koops – H. Jaap-
Henk – R. Leenes, Open-source intelligence and privacy by design, cit.; A. Lyle, Legal considerations for using open source 
intelligence in the context of cybercrime and cyberterrorism , in Open Source Intelligence Investigation: From Strategy to 
Implementation, 2016. 
 267 
General Data Protection Regulation208 and the Police Directive,209 and the use of publicly available 
information. The justification of such practices has mainly revolved around the concept of consent 
and legitimate interest in which the GDPR is rooted. On the one hand, the willing publication of 
data in an open platform is considered a form of implicit consent to third-party surveillance.210 On 
the other hand, t he use of data for anti -money laundering purposes is explicitly classified as  a 
legitimate interest by the GDPR and the anti-money laundering Directive. 
On this second point , a brief digression is necessary regarding the application of the privacy 
regulation to the anti-money laundering field.  
Recital 19 of the GDPR, while clarifying that anti-money laundering compliance duties fall within 
its purview and not the Police Directive, explicitly allows Member States: 
“under specific conditions to restrict by law certain obligations and rights when such a restriction constitutes a 
necessary and proportionate measure in a democratic society to safeguard specific important interests including 
public security and the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of 
criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security. This is 
relevant for instance in the framework of anti-money laundering or the activities”. 
This statement  of principle is translated by article 43 of the Anti -money Laundering Directive 
which categorizes the processing of personal data for anti-money laundering purposes as a matter 
of public interest.211 This, in turn, constitutes one of the legitimate bases for data processing. 
If this is the general framework for the collection and analysis of anti -money laundering data, 
blockchain analy tics tools  partially change the terms  of the discussion . Eminently, the data 
collected and processed through blockchain analysis is not data controlled by the covered entity, 
but rather is public, freely available data. In this sense, the  analysis of blockchain data can be 
classified as an OSINT as the data subjects willingly publish their data in the blockchain ledger 
 
208 Regulation of the European Union, 27th of April 2016, n. 679. 
209 Directive of the European Union, 27th of April 2016 n. 680. 
210 A. Shere, Reading the Investigators their Rights: A review of literature on the General Data Protection Regulation and 
open-source intelligence gathering and analysis, cit., 11. 
211 See article 43 “The processing of personal data on the basis of this Directive for the purposes of the prevention of money 
laundering and terrorist financing as referred to in Article 1 shall be considered to be a matter of public interest under Regulation 
(EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council”. 
 268 
when executing a transaction.212 The ledger is public and the connected information transparent. 
In this sense, the analysis of the data seems to be legitimate as both the consent and the legitimate 
interest recur.213 
At the same time, a fundamental trade-off underlies the relation between privacy and anti-money 
laundering regulation  when it comes to blockchain  analytics.214 If the GDPR requires and 
encourages the creation of privacy -enhancing technologies, 215 the anti -money laundering is 
precisely aimed at curbing such technologies, especially so with public, permissionless blockchain. 
Blockchain data is, many times, the only thing supervisors and covered entities have. This is 
particularly true when it comes to self-hosted addresses or decentralized autonomous 
organizations due to their pseudonymous nature and exclusion from  the purview of compliance 
duties. 
As detailed in sections four and seven of the present chapter, this has led the anti-money laundering 
regulation to be  increasingly wary of privacy-enhancing technologies. The E uropean Banking 
Authority includes the use of privacy -enhancing technologies – as mixers, privacy wallets, and 
privacy coins – among the risk factors to be considered by a covered entity for the application of 
Enhanced Due Diligence . At the same time, privacy -enhancing technologies are increasingly 
labelled as crime facilitators. An extreme case being the sanctioning by OFAC, and contemporary 
arrest of the developer, of the mixer Tornado Cash analysed in the following chapter. 
If this is the position of the anti -money laundering regulation, the GDPR  seems to hold an 
opposite view. Particularly, the progressive identification of core developers as data processors 
and/or controllers may impose a duty (or at least a justification) to provide the anonymization 
which is contrasted by anti -money laundering.216 In a similar fashion, the right to be forgotten 
 
212 For a definition of OSINT see A. Shere, Reading the Investigators their Rights: A review of literature on the General 
Data Protection Regulation and open-source intelligence gathering and analysis, cit., 8. 
213 C. Rueckert, Cryptocurrencies and fundamental rights, cit., 6, distinguishes among tools that simply analyse the 
data and those that also store it (with the second being identified as more problematic in terms of privacy 
protection). 
214 For an analysis concerning the relation existing between GDPR and blockchain see M. Finck, Blockchains 
and Data Protection in the European Union, cit.  
215 See the discussion by M. Finck, Blockchains and data protection in the European Union, cit., 25, which identifies 
privacy coins as a possible solution to the privacy problem. 
216 For a discussion concerning the possible identification of data controllers and processors in 
permissionless blockchain see I. Karasek-Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti-money laundering instruments and 
European data protection requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces, cit., 5 – 8 which also argues for the 
inclusion of core developers. 
 269 
clashes with the usefulness of unmodifiable data for blockchain analysis. 217 There seems to be, 
hence, a clash at the principles level when it comes to development of blockchain ledgers and 
applications.218 The GDPR promotes the anonymization of data. 219 The anti -money laundering 
considers risky, or even criminal, the development of such tools.  
As stated by Karasek-Wojciechowicz: 
“GDPR requirements for personal data protection push permissionless blockchain-based networks towards 
ensuring the anonymization of data processed on a public ledger. Ensuring data anonymization is currently needed 
if public ledgers are to enable GDPR-compliant data processing on ledgers by data controllers and data processors. 
However, at the same time, the privacy-blockchains which use anonymity-enhanced technologies, as well as their 
native privacy-coins, are combated by AML/CFT policies”220 
A further development of this theme is out of the purview of the present dissertation. However, 
the normative dissonance is certainly one that will recur in the future debate concerning blockchain 
transparency and analysis. A conflict that sees two opposed concepts of compliance-by-design, the 
privacy and anti-money laundering one.  
The anti-money laundering regulation seems to have so far prevailed. Faced with growing crime 
rates connected with the pseudonymous and disintermediated nature of blockchain, the 
policymaker has responded  by tightening crime control measures; curbing the opacity of the 
blockchain ledger has been one of the main purposes of such an action. Privacy-enhancing services 
– as mixers, or privacy coins – have been labelled as crime facilitators and discouraged. However, 
as the market normalizes, new and contraposing instances will emerge. The privacy risk posed by 
blockchain’s data structure will have to be assessed and money laundering measures will need to 
be balanced with such opposing interests.  
 
217 M. Finck, Blockchains and data protection in the European Union, cit., 25. 
218 See I. Karasek-Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering instruments and European data protection 
requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces, cit., 10. 
219 This is the conclusion reached by I. Karasek -Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering 
instruments and European data protection requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces, cit., 9, which states “Therefore, 
in my opinion, the GDPR leaves only one option available for permissionless networks to create a protocol enabling GDPR -
compliant processing of data written on the ledger: implementing the technology which will ensure the anonymization of data 
stored on the ledger. The GDPR does not apply to anonymized data”. 
220 See I. Karasek-Wojciechowicz, Reconciliation of anti -money laundering instruments and European data protection 
requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces, cit., 10. 
 270 
In this sense, the legislature should provide for a clear legal basis for blockchain analysis. One that 
strikes a balance between the need to guarantee transparency for financial monitoring and opacity 
for individual privacy. The innovative nature of this analytics technique demands for a legal basis 
to frame blockchain’s data structure and its use by covered entities and supervisors. 
 
 
 271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 272 
Chapter Five  
 
Reigning Decentralized Arrangements 
DAOs, between covered and excluded entities 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
We close our analysis regarding the European anti -money laundering regulation of crypto -assets 
with one of the thorniest problems in the field: the treatment of decentralized arrangements. As 
detailed throughout this thesis , one of the main innovations purported by blockchain is the 
possibility of creating arrangements that function autonomously. 1 By autonomously it is meant 
that the actions of such arrangements – also known as Decentralized Autonomous Organizations 
or DAOs – are not controlled by any governance body as their behaviour is solely dictated by their 
underlying code.2 Once the DAO is launched, no  one (except if such a possibility is provided by 
the code itself) can stop or influence its behaviour.3 
 
1 The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 86. 
2 See the definition by FinCEN, Application of FinCEN’s Regulations to Certain Business Models Involving 
Convertible Virtual Currencies , cit., 3, “ Decentralized (distributed) application (DApp) is a term that refers to software 
programs that operate on a P2P network of computers running a blockchain platform (a type of distributed public ledger that 
allows the development of secondary blockchains), d esigned such that they are not controlled by a single person or group of 
persons (that is, they do not have an identifiable administrator)”; see also the definition provided by H. Axelsen – R. 
Omri, How Should DAOs be Regulated? A New Perspective on Decentralization , cit., 2; S. Hassan – P. De Filippi, 
Decentralized autonomous organization, in Internet Policy Review, 2, 2021, 1. 
3 M. Nadler – F. Schär, Tornado Cash and Blockchain Privacy: A Primer for Economists and Policymakers, cit., 3, “By 
default, the contract logic cannot be changed after deployment. Any asset that is sent to the smart contract will remain in control 
of this smart contract until a condition in its code is met that will transfer the assets to a new address ”; The law society, 
Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 86, “ The design of DeFi infrastructure is for direct 
 273 
From an anti-money laundering perspective, the establishment of such an arrangement creates a 
fundamental problem: compliance duties are thought for human-operated, vertical4 organizations.5 
A machine-operated, headless organization is, hence, largely unfit to comply with the anti -money 
laundering regulations as they are currently structured. Questions such as: who should design and 
apply the compliance duties? Who is liable if such controls are not correctly applied?6 Are difficult 
(if not impossible) to answer in the absence of a management body, or even just humans, that 
govern, control, and run the organization. 
This is a problem the anti-money laundering regulator has increasingly grappled with. Eminently, 
the development of DAOs – especially in the field of finance, with the emergence of Decentralized 
Finance or DeFi – has steadily increased over time.7 Virtually any covered activity under the FATF 
Guidance or MiCaR can be pursued through a decentralized organization. 8 If DAOs were to not 
 
participation on a peer-to-peer or peer to platform systems, and all features and functionality are coded and once executed are 
immutable on the underlying blockchain in a tamper-resistant and transparent form”. 
4 For “vertical” we mean a governance model that is based on a certain level of hierarchy in the decision -
making process, and that is governed through apical bodies that have a power of organization with respect 
to the entity – what we would call management.  
5 H. Axelsen – R. Omri, How Should DAOs be Regulated? A New Perspective on Decentralization, cit., 9, “The core 
problem (…) is that the technological development around blockchain and DAOs offers a transformational shift that challenges 
the existing regulatory paradigm in which an identifiable legal entity is presupposed ”; H. Axelsen - J. Rude Jensen – R. 
Omri, When is a DAO Decentralized?, cit., 52. 
6 This problem is clearly underlined the World Economic Forum in its report, World Economic Forum, 
Pathways to the Regulation of Crypto -Assets: A Global Approach, cit., 10, which states “ identifying the “whom”: 
Accountability of stakeholders in the crypto -assets ecosystem is a core concern for policy -makers. Not to be confused with 
anonymity, accountability refers to the ability of enforcers to hold actors accountable in accordance with th eir relevant legal 
obligations. Accountability may become even more difficult where, for example, wallets are either controlled by multiple actors, 
by automated bots or software or by decentralized autonomous organizations without clear governance structur es in place. In 
each of these instances there arises a risk not of anonymity but of dispersed accountability, making it difficult to causally attach 
the actions of the wallet or decentralized autonomous organization (DAO)”, on a similar note the US Department of 
Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance , cit., 28, “ In some cases, the lack of a clear 
organizational structure may make it difficult to identify any person, group of persons, or entity operating a DeFi service, 
whether because no such person exists or because of distributed, poor, or purposefully confusing organization. This poses critical 
challenges for conducting supervision and, when appropriate, enforcement against DeFi services that are not fulfilling their 
AML/CFT obligations.113 This challenge can be compounded by the fast pace of change in the virtu al asset industry, the 
large and growing number of DeFi services, and limited resources at some regulatory agencies”. 
7 Financial Action Task Force, Targeted update on implementation of the FATF standards on Virtual Assets and 
Virtual Asset Service Providers, cit., 19; for an analysis see OECD, Why Decentralised Finance (DeFi) Matters and 
the Policy Implications, cit. 
8 A good example being Decentralized Exchangers or DEX, as explained by US Department of Treasury, 
Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 11, “In the case of a DEX, liquidity pools are funded by 
participants who may be incentivized by a portion of fees collected by the DEX. Liquidity providers may receive a separate 
virtual asset from the service in exchange for locking in their assets, often referred to as a “liquidity provider token” (LP token) 
that entitles them to their portion of the pool, including any accrued fees.46 Other users, accessing the liquidity pool thro ugh 
the DEX, can then exchange a certain quantity of one virtual asset for a ce rtain quantity of another virtual asset. For these 
types of DEXs, the exchange rate between tokens is typically set by an algorithm.47 Users often pay a fee to use the service,  
which is shared with LP token holders. Similarly, with liquid staking, users st ake virtual assets with a DeFi service and 
 274 
be covered under the sectorial regulation this would generate a relevant loophole. 9 Anyone who 
wished to avoid controls could simply turn to a decentralized arrangement and receive the 
equivalent service.10 At the same time, as controls are currently structured, it seems extremely 
difficult to have them applied to an organization such as a DAO.11  
The present chapter is structured  as follows. Section two and three will analyse two regulatory 
avenues that have been explored by the legislator  to address this problem : the identification of 
responsible entities within DAOs through an expanded notion of control and the increasing 
inclusion of software developers among the covered entities. The fourth section will delve into the 
proposal by the European Parliament to regulate DAOs. The fifth section will explore a recent 
case, the Tornado Cash case, that underlines how supervisors are res ponding to the anti -money 
laundering challenges posed by DAOs. The sixth section will reflect on possible future  solutions 
to the regulation of decentralized arrangements. 
 
2. A quest for control. Identifying governance in decentralized 
autonomous organizations 
 
The first avenue the legislator has traced to address the problem of DAOs ’ regulation has been 
the identification within such organizations of an individual or an entity that, in concreto, can be 
charged with CASP functions.12 To achieve this goal, supervisors are urged to always evaluate the 
 
receive a separate virtual asset in return, which represents the staked virtual assets and any accrued fees from the staking service 
validating transactions on the blockchain. Since LP tokens and virtual assets representing staked assets can be exchanged 
between different persons, it is possible for a different person than the user who original staked the asset to redeem the LP or 
other tokens for the assets that were initially locked in the liquidity pool”. 
9 Financial Action Task Force, Second 12-Month Review of the Revised FATF Standards on Virtual Assets/VASPs, 
Paris, 2021, 33, “A second major challenge to the FATF definition of VASP is its application to so- called ‘decentralised’ 
structures (…) how the FATF Standards apply to such structures is a challenge, as it may be difficult in some cases to identify 
the parties involved with clear responsibility for AML/CFT obligations”. 
10 As underlined by US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 4, 
“industry providers may purposefully seek to decentralize a virtual asset service in an attempt to avoid triggering AML/CFT 
obligations”. 
11 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 26. 
12 Financial Action Task Force, Targeted update on implementation of the FATF standards on Virtual Assets and 
Virtual Asset Service Providers, cit., 20. 
 275 
single arrangement in its concrete functioning and not based on the labels it comes with. 13 
Supervisors are invited to analyse the specific DAO to evaluate whether there is an underlying 
individual or entity that can be deemed to have control of the latter.14  
Eminently, as with all blockchain -based application, there is frequently a gap between label and 
concrete implementation. Blockchain and smart contracts theoretically permit the creation of fully 
autonomous organizations. However, in practice, most of these organizations labelled as 
autonomous are only partially decentralized. The developers tend to retain a certain level of control 
over the arrangement, especially in the initial phase. Full decentralization is frequently an aspiration 
rather than a concrete reality of DAOs.15 It is relevant to remember that the fact an organization 
is rooted in blockchain and functions through smart contracts does not mean it is autonomou s. 
Rather, it means its fundamental rules are executed automatically. If the smart contract gives to an 
individual or a group thereof special management rights, the organization is, at best, only partially 
autonomous. In this sense, the conundrum connected with autonomous organizations shall be 
restricted to that part of the market which is truly decentralized and not to any self-declared DAO. 
This search for control is facilitated by an increasingly wide notion of governance by the sectorial 
anti-money laundering policies. The 2021 FATF Guidance talks, for the establishment of CASP 
duties, about “control or sufficient influence”.16 To better circumscribe these vague notions, the FATF 
has developed a number of indexes to spot the human behind the DAO. These are: 
 
13 See Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 27, “Countries should apply the principles contained in the Standards in a manner that interprets the 
definitions broadly, but with regard for the practical intent of the functional approach. It seems quite common for DeFi 
arrangements to call themselves decent ralized when they actually include a person with control or sufficient influence, and 
jurisdictions should apply the VASP definition without respect to self -description”. In this sense also, US Department 
of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 3. 
14 European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document Accompanying the document Report from the 
Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of the risk of money laundering and terrorist 
financing affecting the internal market and relating to cross -border activities,  cit., 95, “in case a person or a managing body 
can be identified, despite its qualification, the DeFi application shall be treated as a crypto -assets services provider and fall 
under the same AML/CFT obligations. Therefore, much like with NFTs, DEFIs may be subjected  to the application of 
the relevant rules covering crypto - assets on a case -by-case basis but keep posing regulatory challenges that are not yet fully 
addressed and could conduct to take additional measures to better tackle them in the future ”. European Commission, 
Commission Staff Working Document Accompanying the document Report from the Commission to the European Parliament 
and the Council on the assessment of the risk of money laundering and terrorist financing affecting the internal market and 
relating to cross-border activities,  SWD(2022), 27th October 2022, 95 
15 The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 138. 
16 See Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 27. 
 276 
“who profits from the use of the service or asset, who established and can change the rules, who can make decisions 
affecting operations, who generated and drove the creation and launch of a product or service, who maintains an 
ongoing business relationship with a contracting party or another person who possesses and controls the data on its 
operations, and who could shut down the product or service”. 17 
However, it is the same FATF to clarify that this list is merely illustrative as “individual situations will 
vary and this list is not definitive and offers only some examples”.18  
This first policy avenue could be defined as more conservative. The idea is to expand the notion 
of control to somewhat fit the functioning of a DAO within that of classic centralized firm. This 
is not to mean that this approach is unjustified. As mentioned, many DAOs are indeed only 
partially decentralized.19 Meaning that, while part of the DAO’s activity is automatized, there is still 
a centre of control that retains the means to shut the arrangements, modify its code, influence the 
decision-making process etc.20 Furthermore, most DAOs – despite being registered as NGOs or 
Foundations – are created by individual/s that intend to profit from the latter. It can be argued 
 
17 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 36. 
18 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 36; on the vagueness of the concept of decentralization and for a proposal to define 
and discern decentralized v. centralized arrangements, see H. Axelsen - J. Rude Jensen – R. Omri, When is 
a DAO Decentralized?, cit., 55; see on the multidimensional nature of this definition Hassan – P. De Filippi, 
Decentralized autonomous organization, cit., 6 – 7. 
19 OECD, Why Decentralised Finance (DeFi) Matters and the Policy Implications , cit., 20; H. Axelsen - J. Rude 
Jensen – R. Omri, When is a DAO Decentralized?, cit., 55; O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or 
“disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response? , cit., 7; US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk 
Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 12; The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, 
cit., 136, “in practice, most so-called DAOs are in fact DOs, because although both have internal capital (i.e. a treasury, 
however structured), few so-called DAOs are capable of making autonomous decisions and instead rely on human interaction 
and decision -making, wi th some degree of automation and blockchain technology involved in the governance process and 
implementing the outcome of decisions”. 
20 TRM Labs, Compliance in the second age of digital assets: How crypto compliance programs are evolving in 2023 , cit., 
4, “while FATF standards do not apply to soft - ware such as DeFi protocols themselves, they can apply to persons who 
maintain control or sufficient influence over a DeFi arrangement or protocol providing VASP services (…) Similarly, although 
DeFi currently falls outside the EU’s Market in Crypto- Assets (MiCA) legislation, individual entities could potentially be 
answer- able to the Fifth Anti-Money Laundering Directive (5AMLD) if a supervisor identified a “person with significant 
control” that should be registered as a cryptoasset service provider due to the services the DAO is carrying out”; on a similar 
note US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 11; The law 
society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 139, “As a rule of thumb, if a party can intervene 
in the operations of a DAO or its protocol in the case of an emergency, that party may be construed as having a control 
relationship. DAOs and their legal advisors should carefully consider such arrangements, their purpose and intended duration. 
Eventually, that link may need to be severed to defend against a control challenge with legal and regulatory obligations 
potentially also arising if such a determination is upheld”. 
 277 
that with profit comes certain responsibility – like ensuring such a profit is not the result of 
processing ill-sourced money.  
At the same time, this case -by-case approach is problematic in terms of legal certainty and may 
lead to a chaotic regulation-through-enforcement scenario.21 
Eminently, neither the FATF nor the MiCaR provide for a customized regulation of DAOs  nor 
of partially decentralized DAOs. The same exclusion of decentralized arrangements by MiCaR, is 
only spelled out by recital 21 which states: 
“This Regulation should apply to natural and legal persons and certain other undertakings and to the crypto-asset 
services and activities performed, provided or controlled, directly or indirectly, by them, including when part of such 
activities or services is performed in a decentralised manner. Where crypto-asset services are provided in a fully 
decentralised manner without any intermediary, they should not fall within the scope of this Regulation. This 
Regulation covers the rights and obligations of issuers of crypto-assets, offerors, persons seeking admission to 
trading of crypto-assets and crypto-asset service providers. Where crypto-assets have no identifiable issuer, they 
should not fall within the scope of Title II, III or IV of this Regulation. Crypto-asset service providers providing 
services in respect of such crypto-assets should, however, be covered by this Regulation”. 
The absence of any reference to decentralized arrangements in the binding part of the Regulation 
leaves their policing in a legal vacuum. Particularly, the main question is where the line should be 
drawn between partially and fully decentralized arrangements. In the absence of a clear definition 
of decentralization, this question is  hard to answer. Furthermore, in the absence of any duty of 
registration on DAOs, there is no moment when the supervisor can evaluate ex-ante whether the 
arrangement is only part ially decentralized and, hence, signal to the regulated entity its duty to 
comply with relevant regulations. The risk is to transform enforcement in a case-by-case exercise, 
pursued ex-post on entities that may ignore their duty to comply.22 In such a scenario, the imposition 
of sanctions, especially when criminal in nature, may result complex due to a de facto impossibility 
to comprehend when compliance duties apply and by whom they should be applied. 
 
21 For an example of how such a scenario may look like see the Tornado Cash case described in the last 
section of the present chapter. 
22 Which seems exactly what suggested by European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document 
Accompanying the document Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of 
the risk of money laundering and terrorist financing affecting the internal market and relating to cross -border activities, cit., 
95. 
 278 
This lack of clarity is even more troubling if we analyse how control is wielded in DAOs. While 
some DAOs do have a certain form of governance, such governance is usually exercised in non -
traditional manners. A good example being the use of governance and voting tokens.  
In a DAO most decisions are taken through voting.23 The idea is to eliminate centralized decision-
makers and leave, instead, each decision to the shareholders/investors, this way eliminating 
internal intermediaries – as directors or managers. In a sense, the difference between DAOs and 
traditional corporation s can be equated to the distinction between representative and direct 
democracies. A traditional corporation is an exercise of representative democracy. Shareholders 
nominate their representative s – the director /s and /or the president – who then make the 
decisions for them. The representatives are then (theoretically) held accountable for their a ctions 
and, if not satisfactory, replaced. In contrast, a DAO is an exercise of direct, Athenian, democracy. 
Every decision is taken by the totality of the shareholders through direct voting. To exercise this 
voting right, the shareholder is provided with a voting or governance token. One of the m ain 
avenues for developers to retain control is , thus, to hold a majority of the governance tokens so 
to always have a decisive influence on the decision-making process . However, holding such a 
majority is a de facto notation, one that derives from the participation in the capital of the 
arrangement or from contractual agreements. How stable and how relevant should this voting 
majority be to qualify as control remains an open question. Furthermore, currently, shareholders 
are under no duty to design or apply an anti-money laundering compliance system. Hence, if such 
a prevalence in the concrete governance was to be recognized as control it would surreptitiously 
introduce a duty on shareholders to design and app ly an anti-money laundering compliance 
framework, at least in DAOs.  
This seems to be the avenue taken by the United States’ Department of Treasury.24 Which states: 
“Moreover, distribution and concentration of governance tokens and voting demonstrate control over decentralized 
applications. In some services, governance tokens or voting rights may be concentrated and held by a limited 
number of actors. Developers and early investors in a DeFi service may keep control of the service by allocating 
significant shares of governance tokens to themselves or otherwise maintaining de facto control. Concentration of 
 
23 Bank of England, Financial Stability in Focus: Cryptoassets and decentralised finance, cit., 29. 
24 A similar parallel between voting rights and control is made by The law society, Blockchain: Legal and 
regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 138, “if the concentration of voting power is too high then this questions whether, in 
fact, the DAO can be considered decentralised due to power to making decisions on sitting with so few”. 
 279 
influence within a DeFi service can also result from a low level of participation by governance token holders in 
voting, providing outsized voting power to the minority of token holders that do participate. Separately, some 
services allow for the delegation of voting rights associated with governance tokens to other persons, called delegates, 
while the token holder retains the economic benefits of the token. In some cases, delegates accumulate significant 
voting rights associated with a large number of governance tokens, and this model can result in a relatively small 
number of delegates holding a large portion of voting power for a DeFi service. Within this framework, the use of 
governance tokens does not necessarily equate to decentralization in decision making for the services, and the 
ownership of voting rights for many governance tokens can be highly concentrated. As a result, in many cases a 
small number of persons may be able to exercise a high degree of control even if the governance structure purports to 
be decentralized”.25 
Such an extension is not unreasonable per se. However, it warrants a clear legal basis. Eminently, 
currently, the Union’s anti-money laundering framework ascribes the duty to comply to the “senior 
management”.  
Article 5, paragraph 8, of the Directive states: 
“Member States shall require obliged entities to obtain approval from their senior management for the policies, 
controls and procedures that they put in place and to monitor and enhance the measures taken, where 
appropriate”. 
Similarly, the upcoming Anti-money Laundering Regulation requires, at article 9, paragraph 1, 
obliged entities to: 
“appoint one executive member of their board of directors or, if there is no board, of its equivalent governing body 
who shall be responsible for the implementation of measures to ensure compliance with this Regulation (‘compliance 
manager’). Where the entity has no governing body, the function should be performed by a member of its senior 
management”. 
Senior management is, in turn, defined by article 3, paragraph 12, of the Directive as: 
 
25 US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 12. 
 280 
“an officer or employee with sufficient knowledge of the institution's money laundering and terrorist financing risk 
exposure and sufficient seniority to take decisions affecting its risk exposure, and need not, in all cases, be a 
member of the board of directors”.26 
The current framework makes, hence, no mention of shareholders as involved in the compliance 
process. The definition of senior management is shaped  around the concept of traditional firm s 
and seems hardly adaptable to fluid structures such as DAOs. In this sense, de iure condito  the 
identification of governance centres with anti-money laundering duties will be left to case-by-case 
decisions taken by the supervisors.  
This uncertainty is underlined by the World Economic Forum in its analysis of crypto-assets 
regulation:  
“case law in the United States has suggested that jurisdictions may treat unincorporated DAOs as general 
partnerships, with liability attributed to individuals holding tokens in the DAO as general partners. Where the 
governance structures of such organizations are not clear, it may mean that policy-makers and regulatory 
authorities may find it difficult to single out individual actors to hold accountable”.27 
This case-by-case approach seems hardly like a good option and certainly not in line with MiCaR’s 
resolve to provide for a clear legal basis to market participants. Rather, a clear definition of what 
decentralized means should be provided as well as parameters to ascertain when such 
decentralization is insufficient to warrant an exclusion of the compliance duties. Furthermore, 
criteria should be offered to identify, in cases of only partial disintermediation, the bodies 
responsible for the establishment, maintenance, and implementation of compliance programs.  
In favour of a similar clear identification  is the report requested by the European Parliament on 
the remaining challenges left by MiCaR which states: 
“fully decentralized platforms have evaded regulation so far, arguing they lack an entity that could provide the 
disclosure. As we have pointed out frequently, we do not believe this argument holds merit; most often, an entity or 
a group of persons drives the code development and marketing of its tokens. It is for these reasons that we suggest 
 
26 A nearly identical definition is provided by the upcoming Anti -money Laundering Regulation which at 
article 2, para. 28 defines senior management as “in addition to executive members of the board of directors or, if there 
is no board, of its equivalent governing body, an officer or employee with sufficient knowledge of the institution's money 
laundering and terrorist financing risk exposure and sufficient seniority to take decisions affecting its risk exposure”. 
27 World Economic Forum, Pathways to the Regulation of Crypto-Assets: A Global Approach, cit., 10 
 281 
granting entity status for regulatory purposes to DAOs, for micro-prudential and also sustainable finance 
regulation. These regulated entities should then be added to the scope of the SFDR and the Taxonomy Regulation, 
subject to reasonable size thresholds. However, the legal entity engaged in product development and distribution of 
services of the fully decentralized platform may register itself as an operator for the purposes of EU financial 
regulation and comply with sustainability disclosure obligations on behalf of the platform”.28 
In this sense, the legislator should clearly define what a Decentralized Autonomous Organization 
is (as the European Parliament had proposed in one of MiCaR’s earlier versions).29 It should also 
spell out the characteristics that distinguish a fully and a partially decentralized DAO as well as the 
who, how, and where of connected compliance duties. In this sense, a good option may be to 
extend the general duty of registration to DAOs. Through the registration process, the supervisor 
could evaluate the DAOs governance structure and apply, ex ante , the necessary compliance 
measures.  
 
3. Compliance-by-design and software developers. Pushing back the 
compliance threshold 
 
The second regulatory avenue taken by the legislator to reign on DAOs starts from a factual 
notation: in a DAO, a participant can only do what the code affords them. The DAO, if 
decentralized, cannot be bent into doing anything that is not provided by its code.30 In this sense, 
it would be disproportionate to ask for compliance with anti -money laundering duties to parties 
that miss the concrete code-given capacity to implement them. Hence, to apply compliance duties 
the corresponding powers should already be provided by the code underlying the DAO.    
Let’s give two examples to clarify.  
 
28 D.A. Zetzsche - R.P. Buckley - D.W. Arner - M.C. van Ek, Remaining regulatory challenges in digital finance and 
crypto- assets after MiCA, cit., 73. 
29 See section four of the present chapter. 
30 H. Axelsen – R. Omri, How Should DAOs be Regulated? A New Perspective on Decentralization, cit., 2. 
 282 
The first one concerns token holders. One of the key requirements under the anti -money 
laundering framework is to identify customers. Let’s say that token holders are recognized as 
entities with sufficient control  and, thus, responsible for the  implementation of a  compliance 
framework. The imposition of mandatory identification is only possible for token holders if the 
smart contract underlying the DAO allows them to take and implement such a decision. If the 
DAO’s smart contract does not allow this action, the token holders would be concretely unable to 
implement a Know Your Customer program. As it is clear, such an impossibility would frustrate 
the aim of the legislator to extend to the latter compliance duties and corresponding criminal and 
administrative liabilities, ad impossibilia nemo tenur. 
The second example concerns the key players of this section:  software developers. One of the 
indexes identified by the FATF to ascertain control is profit. 31 If an entity profits from the 
functioning of a DAO, then it should also be  responsible for the connected compliance duties. 
The main problem with this approach is that if the developer lacks the code-given power to change 
the smart contract they are concretely unable to adapt it to the regulatory requirements. While the 
idea that profit corresponds to responsibility seems theor etically fair, it may be concretely 
impossible to implement. If the developer is to be responsible for implementing compliance, then 
this duty should be imposed when they are designing  the smart contract not once is up and 
running.  
This notation brings us to the second, more innovative, strategy taken by the policymaker to extend 
compliance to DAOs : the expansion of the purview of the anti -money laundering duties to the 
software developer by, at least partially, including the latter among the CASPs .32 The main idea 
behind such expansion is that if a developer computes a software that will pursue a covered activity 
autonomously, then they should ensure the same software will, or at least can, comply with the 
relevant regulations. This concept of engrain ed compliance is increasingly common in the 
regulation of autonomous software under the brand of compliance -by-design.33 For instance, a 
 
31 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 36. 
32 The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 138, “The obvious point here is that 
a DAO does not spontaneously come into existence. The above components evidence a concerted effort by a group of people 
acting together to create the infrastructure through which a DAO can be created and operated. The number of participants in 
that group, and their geographic spread may vary, but they are very clearly not decentralised, by necessity”. 
33 For a compliance-by-design proposal in the field of DeFi see B. Mesquita – S. Maranhao – J. Seigneur, 
Enabling KYC and AML verification in DeFi service, cit.; H. Axelsen – J. Jensen – R. Omri, When is a DAO 
Decentralized?, cit., 70. On the shift from an activity -based to a risk -based concept of criminal liabilities in 
 283 
similar perspective underlies the European Proposal for an AI Act. 34 There, pre-launch engrained 
compliance is mandated for autonomous software depending on their risk rating.35 
A similar , by -design, approach  was proposed by the European Banking Authority in its first 
opinion on virtual currencies in 2014.36 In that opinion the EBA recommended that any virtual 
currencies have a “Scheme Governance Authority”. The Authority was envisioned as  a non-
governmental, legal person accountable to the regulator for the implementation of legal 
requirements. The institution of such an entity would have been  “a mandatory requirement for a VC 
scheme to be regulated as a financial service and for it to be allowed to interact with existing regulated financial 
services”.37 The idea was, hence, to impose to developers a certain level of centralization, through 
the mandatory creation of a “command centre” that could guarantee compliance with legislative 
requirements. 
However, the implementation of this approach in the anti -money laundering field is particularly 
contentious. This type of compliance clashes with one of the principles we have identified as 
fundamental in the sectorial regulation: technological neutrality.  
As clearly stated by the FATF: 
“the FATF does not seek to regulate the technology that underlies VAs or VASP activities, but rather the 
natural or legal persons behind such technology or software applications that may use technology or software 
applications to facilitate financial activity or conduct as a business the aforementioned VA activities on behalf of 
another natural or legal person. A person that develops or sells either a software application of a new VA 
platform (i.e., a software developer) may therefore not constitute a VASP when solely developing or selling the 
application or platform, but they may be a VASP if they also use the new application or platform to engage as a 
 
modern digital societies see G. Morgante, Criminal Law and Risk Management: From Tradition to Innovation , in 
Global Jurist, 16/3, 2016, 321. 
34 The AI Act is envisioned by the Commission as the first European comprehensive regulation of artificial 
intelligence to play a similar role as the MiCa Regulation in the crypto -assets space. For more on the 
proposal see, Proposal for a Regulation of the E uropean Union, 21st of April 2021, n. 0106; T. Madiega, 
Artificial intelligence act, European Parliament: European Parliamentary Research Service, 2021. 
35 For the connection between risk and regulation in the AI Act see J. Schuett, Risk management in the artificial 
intelligence act, in European Journal of Risk Regulation, 2023. 
36 European Banking Authority, Opinion on “Virtual Currencies”, cit. 
37 European Banking Authority, Opinion on “Virtual Currencies”, cit., 39 – 40. 
 284 
business in exchanging or transferring funds or conducting any of the other financial activity described above on 
behalf of another natural or legal person”.38 
The same approach is taken by MiCaR  at recital 22, mentioned in the previous section  of the 
chapter.39 
Prima facie then, the line between covered and excluded activity can be traced in the distinction 
between designing and operating a software. 40 The first activity being outside of the regulatory 
corral. At the same time, behind such statements of principle there seem s to be an increasing 
interest, especially at the FATF level, to move beyond the exclusion. 41 This is done, so  far, with 
nuanced affirmations that seem to contradict the clear, above -quoted, exclusion. For example, it 
is the same Guidance of 2021 that affirms: 
“A person that creates or sells a software application or a VA platform (i.e., a software developer) may therefore 
not constitute a VASP, when solely creating or selling the application or platform (…) a party directing the 
creation and development of the software or platform, so that they can provide VASP services as a business for or 
on behalf of another person, likely also qualifies as a VASP, in particular if they retain control or sufficient 
influence over the assets, software, protocol, or platform or any ongoing business relationship with users of the 
software even if this is exercised through a smart contract. Such a VASP is therefore responsible for complying 
with the relevant AML/CFT obligations. As such, they should undertake ML/TF risk assessments prior to 
 
38 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 17, this same approach is confirmed the following year in the Financial Action Task 
Force, Targeted update on implementation of the FATF standards on Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset Service Providers, 
cit., 19. See also the opinion of FinCEN, Application of FinCEN’s Regulations to Certain Business Models Involving 
Convertible Virtual Currencies, cit., 5, “The development of a DApp financed through ICO fundraising activity consists of 
the production of goods or services, and therefore is outside the definition of money transmission. Thus, the developer of a DApp 
is not a money transmitter for the mere act of creating the application, even if the purpose of the DApp is to issue a CVC or 
otherwise facilitate financial activities denominated in CVC However, if the developer of the DApp uses or deploys it to engage 
in money transmission, then the developer will qualify as a money transmitter under the BSA”. 
39 See section two of the present chapter. 
40 B. Mesquita – S. Maranhao – J. Seigneur, Enabling KYC and AML verification in DeFi service, cit., 3; US 
Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 2; 32, “ Globally, under the 
standards set by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the global standard setting body for AML/CFT, DeFi services 
that lack an entity with sufficient control or influence over the service may not be explicitly subject to AML/CFT obligations”. 
41 See also Banca d’Italia, Comunicazione della Banca d’Italia in materia di tecnologie decentralizzate nella finanza e 
cripto-attività, cit., 23. 
 285 
the launch or use of the software or platform and take appropriate measures to mitigate the risks in an ongoing 
and forward-looking manner”.42 
Here, the FATF first excludes software developers but then seems to reintroduce them, precisely 
by imposing the above-mentioned by-design compliance duties – i.e., software developers should 
mitigate the risks in the design phase in a forward-looking manner.  
A similar approach emerges from the advises the Guidance directs to States. These are not directly 
binding; they are rather suggestions aimed at helping Countries to better manage high -risk areas. 
In particular, the FATF, analysing the risks posed by DeFi and possible avenues to mitigate them, 
asserts: 
“Potential mitigation measures could include, for example (…) controlling whether/how AML/CFT preventive 
measures are built into the arrangement and/or by ensuring that AML/CFT obligations of obliged entities 
within the arrangement are fulfilled, e.g. by using software to monitor transactions and detect suspicious activity. 
Supervisors should look for these mitigation measures to be in place before granting registration/licensing and on 
an ongoing basis. It will be more difficult to mitigate risks of these products once they are launched”.43 
A similar code -centric approach is proposed by the French Autorité de contrôle Prudential et de 
Resolution in its opinion on MiCaR. Particularly, the Authority proposes to: 
“to explore other types of solutions as well, drawing in particular on non-financial regulations, such as those 
governing product safety in the European Union (EU). In these particular regulations, a number of requirements 
are placed directly on products, thus building a chain of obligations for all players involved in their manufacture 
and distribution, which may notably lead to substitution mechanisms when one of these players is located outside 
the European Union. Thus, this paper proposes a certification system for smart contracts, which would apply to 
the product itself, without the need to define a person that would be directly responsible for compliance with this 
obligation. If no one wants to have a product certified, that product will simply not be distributed. This makes it 
 
42 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 32. 
43 Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset 
Service Providers, cit., 39. 
 286 
possible to define a set of products deemed “safe”, which will be the only ones that can be offered by the 
intermediaries ensuring access to DeFi services for the greatest number of people”.44 
A similar position is taken by the Bank of Italy in its evaluation concerning DeFi regulation. As it 
states: 
“Taking into consideration the difficulty in some cases - think, for example, of the case of DeFi in its "pure" sense 
- of identifying specific subjects to which certain requirements are to be applied, the possibility of intervening in the 
processes of defining and developing the technological standards used is susceptible to further study, with a view to 
strengthening the necessary risk mitigation safeguards”.45 
While not clear-cut statements, these may point in the direction of an increasing direct involvement 
of anti-money laundering supervisors when it comes to the technological architecture underlying 
crypto-assets.46 This would be an interesting development as it would signal a partial departure 
from the traditional intermediary-based approach towards an increasingly code -based one. 
However, it is still too early to evaluate the extent to which compliance-by-design will penetrate as 
an enforcement strategy in the decentralized market. We will further discuss the hurdles connected 
with enforcing by-design compliance on autonomous software in section four of the present 
chapter. Let’s, however, first focus on how such an engrained compliance model may work in a 
decentralized autonomous organization. 
The main trade -off when introducing, by -design, compliance in DAOs is, as in most of  our 
analysis, between decentralization and centralization. The reason why DAOs are perceived as a 
valuable tool is precisely their decentralization. The business case advanced by decentralized 
organizations is to get rid of intermediaries and solely trust  the code. DAOs, it is argued, would 
 
44 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response? , cit., 73; 
advocating for a similar product -centric solution the Bank of Italy, see Banca d’Italia, Comunicazione della 
Banca d’Italia in materia di tecnologie decentralizzate nella finanza e cripto -attività, cit., 10, “specie nelle aree più distanti 
dal perimetro regolamentare, dove più avvertita è la dominanza del fattore tecnologico e dei soggetti che lo generano e lo 
condizionano – esiste lo spazio per lavorare alla definizione di standard a cui fare riferimento quali  “parametri di qualità” 
degli aspetti costitutivi delle tecnologie decentralizzate (come gli smart contracts)”. 
45 Banca d’Italia, Comunicazione della Banca d’Italia in materia di tecnologie decentralizzate nella finanza e cripto-attività, 
cit., 23, translation from italian, “Considerata anche la difficoltà in alcuni casi – si pensi ad esempio al caso della DeFi 
nella sua accezione “pura” – di individuare soggetti specifici cui applicare determinati requisiti, è suscettibile di 
approfondimento, nell’ottica di un rafforzamento dei necessari presidi di mitigazione dei rischi, la possibilità di intervenire sui 
processi di definizione e di sviluppo degli standard tecnologici utilizzati”. 
46 On the central role of developers in the DeFi space and connected regulation see Banca d’Italia, 
Comunicazione della Banca d’Italia in materia di tecnologie decentralizzate nella finanza e cripto-attività, cit., 6 – 7. 
 287 
allow investors to take back control of their assets.  However, compliance systems require some 
form of centralized human intervention to guarantee overview and liability allocation. In this sense, 
the main problem is how to reintroduce centralization without thwarting the core of DAOs 
innovation: code-enabled trust. Eminently, while many activities could be automatized – as KYC 
controls through digital identities – human supervision is still needed. In this sense, supervisors 
and developers should study how  to build compliance systems which do not interfere with the 
core elements of a DAO’s decentralized model.  
The trade-off does not mean the problem is unsurmountable. Let’s make an example of what a 
possible solution could look like: a compliance oracle system. As we have seen in chapter two, 
section eight, oracle systems are an integral part of smart contract development. They permit 
feeding a smart contract with external information to make decisions. A compliance oracle system 
– which would mimic the functioning of a compliance department – could, then, be built within a 
DAO.47 The DAO’s smart contract would be required to refer any compliance-sensitive question 
– as whether to onboard a client or file a S uspicious Activity Report – to such oracle. The oracle 
would then decide the course to take or could submit – at least in the most relevant cases – its 
opinion to the token holders for their ultimate decision . Such an oracle system would certainly 
recreate a certain level of centralization. However, the centralization would be limited in scope and 
visible to anyone joining the DAO who, by analysing the smart contract, would know in which 
cases a centralized decision will be taken. In addition, it would also allow precise identification of 
liabilities as decisions taken would be recorded in a shared, immutable record. Furthermore, given 
the deterministic nature of the smart contract, the oracle system could be submitted to the 
supervisor at the registration phase and be provided with a seal of compliance regarding the overall 
anti-money laundering strategy. 
From a supervisory perspective , an oracle system managed through blockchain could ease 
supervision. On the one hand, given the immutability of the ledger , the decisions taken by the 
oracle would be transparent and auditable by the supervisors and external auditors. On the other 
hand, the publicity of the ledger could allow real -time supervision of the organization and trigger 
an inspection only when specific red flags are identified.   
 
47 The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 89 
 288 
This is just an example of how compliance could work in a decentralized system. What is key here 
is underlining that to respond to the challenges created by DAO s new responses are needed. To 
adapt, legislators and supervisors have to increasingly focus on the supervision of coding. 
Informatic code is a neutral means filled with content by developers. The legislator has to act on 
such developers to guarantee legal principles are part of that content. Ex-post, reactive supervision 
and regulation are no more s ufficient. Direct architectural intervention is key if we intend to 
adequately respond to the emerging challenges.  
 
4. The Parliament’s proposal for the Market in Crypto-assets Regulation. 
Lights and shades of an attempt to customized compliance. 
 
De iure condito, the duties laid down by the European regulation  on decentralized arrangements  
follow a traditional approach.  DAOs are excluded from the regulatory purview and are not even 
categorized as a separate entity under MiCaR. Throughout this chapter, we have underlined how 
this approach seems to generate a lacuna, one that opens the way to legal uncertainty and criminal 
opportunities. However, as part of the MiCaR’s legislative process, a proposal for a more tailored 
strategy to decentralized arrangements had surfaced.  
The first position (hereinafter Proposal) taken by the European Parliament on the MiCaR’s initial 
text included a specific regulation for decentralized autonomous organizations.48 While this part 
of the Proposal has not been included in the final text, it represents an interesting example of the 
complexities, and possible solutions, connected with the regulation of decentralized autonomous 
organizations. 
Let’s then delve into this policy.  
Article 3 of the Proposal included a definition of decentralized autonomous organization, which 
was defined as: 
 
48 European Parliament, Report - A9-0052/2022 on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of 
the Council on markets in crypto-assets and amending Directive (EU) 2019/1937, 17 March 2022.  
 289 
“a rule-based organisational system that is not controlled by any central authority and whose rules are entirely 
routed in its algorithm”. 
This definition traced the line, between autonomous and traditional arrangements, in the concept 
of control. Autonomous is an organization where control solely lies in the rules established by the 
algorithm and no central, human authority retains unilateral governance powers.  
Besides the definition, the Proposal laid down a specific discipline for DAOs. Particularly, the text 
shifted the authorization process from the issuer/offeror to the organization. As clarified by 
recitals 11 and 13, if the issuance of crypto -assets was to be pursued in a decentralized fashion 
there was no need for the issuer/offeror to “ organise as a single legal entity and should not be subject to 
regulation until the offering of the crypto-assets to the public is centralized”.49  
Notwithstanding this exclusion, the Proposal , rather than ignoring decentralized autonomous 
organizations, provided for a customized discipline. This intention was clearly laid down by recital 
13-a which stated: 
“some types of crypto-assets are not issued by legal entities, but are instead managed by decentralised autonomous 
organisations. Provided that such crypto-assets are compatible with the requirements of this Regulation and do not 
pose a risk to investor protection, market integrity or financial stability, competent authorities should be permitted 
to admit such crypto-assets to trading on a Union trading platform for crypto-assets”. 
Let’s then see what this discipline looked like. 
 
49 See European Parliament, Report - A9-0052/2022 on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and 
of the Council on markets in crypto -assets and amending Directive (EU) 2019/1937 , cit., recital 12 states “ given the 
different risks and opportunities raised by crypto-assets, it is necessary to lay down rules for issuers of crypto-assets that should 
be any legal person who offers to the public any type of crypto -assets or seeks the admission of such crypto -assets to a trading 
platform for crypto-assets. An issuer of crypto-assets should be a legal or natural person who issues any type of crypto -assets. 
An offeror of crypto -assets should be a legal entity that offers to the public any type of crypto -assets or asks for admission to 
trading of such crypto-assets on a trading platform for crypto-assets. Sometimes the issuance and exchange of crypto-assets may 
be decentralised, and that should be reflected and considered by the relevant legislation. Such decentralised issuers should not be 
required to organise as a single legal entity and should not be subject to regulation until the offering of the crypto -assets to the 
public is centralized”, recital 13 stated “To ensure that all offers to the public of crypto -assets, other than asset -referenced 
tokens or e-money tokens, in the Union, or all the admissions of such crypto-assets to trading on a trading platform for crypto-
assets are properly monitored and supervis ed by competent authorities, all issuers of crypto -assets should be legal entities. In 
order to promote, rather than to hinder, the decentralised issuance of crypto -assets, that requirement should not apply to 
decentralised issuers of crypto-assets unless and until the issuance of their crypto-assets is centralised”. 
 290 
As clarified by article 4, DAOs w ere among the entities authorized to offer crypto -assets to the 
public. However, to perform such an issuance, the same article , at paragraph 3-b, required 
“competent authorities shall ensure that (decentralized autonomous organizations follow) steps identical to those set 
out in paragraph 1, points (b) to (d), have been taken”.  
These requirements are, in sum, two. First, draft, notif y, and publish a white paper with the 
characteristics mandated by MiCaR (as detailed in chapter three, part two, section three  of this 
text). Second, receive an authorization to operate within the Union by the competent authority of 
the home jurisdiction. According to the Proposal, then, DAOs were not obliged to follow all the 
duties laid down for a crypto-assets offers. Specifically, they were exempted from the requirements 
connected with the issuers/offerors company structure and composition. The Proposal,  thus, 
recognized the specificities connected with the DAO’s business  model and, in particular, their 
detachment from any centralized issuer or offeror.  
At the same time, the Proposal required DAOs to undergo an authorization process before 
operating within the Union. Interestingly for our ends, among the requirements imposed on a 
DAO the Proposal excluded the one laid down by letter ea ) of the same article which require d a 
crypto-assets offeror to guarantee it “ has measures in place to prevent the misuse of the offering of crypto -
assets to the public or trading on a platform for crypto -assets for the purposes of money laundering or financing of 
terrorism in accordance with Directive (EU) 2015/849 of the European Parliament and of the Council ”. Such 
an exclusion, if read together with the above-mentioned recital 13-a would have led to include 
among the elements to be evaluated by the competent authority only the risks posed to investor 
protection, market integrity , or financial stability.  This exclusi on is not clearly explainable and 
seems an oversight rather than a conscious choice also considering the initial stage of this Proposal. 
Eminently, there is no apparent reason why, once a DAO’s structure is evaluated for registration, 
elements such as market integrity and investor protection should be assessed and not money 
laundering prevention.  
The Proposal certainly included elements of great interest and innovation.  
Particularly, the introduction of a definition of decentralized autonomous organization contributed 
to legal certainty and g ave legal recognition to a pervasive phenomenon of the crypto -sphere. In 
addition, rooting the definition of DAO around the concept of control seems a correct choice. As 
underlined throughout this text, what distinguishes centralized and decentralized arrangements – 
 291 
and generates the connected risks – is not the data storage  model, or the technological 
infrastructure, but the governance structure. An arrangement or network is decentralized when its 
functioning does not depend on and cannot be influenced by a single (or a consortium) entity and 
is instead solely entrusted to the algorithm and distributed community of nodes. It is in this shift 
in the governance model that the key innovation of blockchain resides. Of great significance is the 
distinction made by the defi nition of algorithmic rules and centralized control. Following the 
definition, for an arrangement to be classified as decentralized both elements have to be present. 
This is a welcomed distinction. Eminently, algorithmic governance per se is not a guarantee of 
decentralization. The mere fact an organization’s rules are encoded in an algorithm does not equate 
to decentralization. Algorithmic rules are a neutral medium , they can equally warrant centralized, 
unilateral control to a single or a group of individuals or decentralized, algorithmic governance. It 
is, hence, relevant that the definition distinguishes among the two characteristics that, together, 
define a DAO: an architecture  rooted in algorithmic rules and the absence of centralized 
governance.  
Shifting to the  content of the Proposal , including DAOs within the purview of the registration 
regime seems a reasonable choice. Once a DAO is up and running it is complex to control its 
actions. However, if the control is imposed ex-ante, it is much easier to assess risk s and mitigate 
them. Furthermore, the registration requirement is also more in line with the nature of the DAO. 
A DAO is essentially a string of code, a product, which once launched provides services according 
to its fundamental rules of fu nctioning. In this sense, as with products, an ex-ante assessment 
concerning their safety is more effective and better addresses the risks.50 If a failure or a weakness 
is identified in a DAO this can be addressed directly by the manufacturer (the developer) before 
the product enters the market. In a similar sense, extending the duty to draft a white paper seems 
reasonable as it constitutes a moment for developers to reflect and explain , to supervisors and 
investors, their DAO’s business model and compliance mechanisms. 
 
5. A cautionary tale: the Tornado Cash case 
 
50 For a similar approach see the opinion of the French Autorité de contrôle prudentiel et de resolution at footnote 
707. 
 292 
 
If the above is the law in the books’ response to the problem of decentralization, a recent case 
allows us to take a peek into how the law in action will address decentralized arrangements. While 
Regulators are grappling with the policing of decentralized arrangements, Law Enforcement 
Authorities and Courts are faced with their effects. Eminently, the abstract risks posed by 
decentralized organizations have indeed converted into reality. These arrangements are used by 
criminals as a means to blur their tran saction trail without undergoing compliance checks. Faced 
with such a reality, enforcement authorities are urged to act.51 In the absence of a clear regulatory 
strategy aimed at addressing the risks posed by DAOs, a chaotic regulation -though-enforcement 
strategy will necessarily emerge to address the emerging risks, at least when they become too big 
to ignore. 
The first, and so far only, case of this kind occurred in the summer of 2022. On the 8th of August 
of 2022, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) 
sanctioned the crypto-assets mixer Tornado Cash.52 The mixer was accused of having been used 
to launder more than seven billion dollars’ worth of crypto-assets, including 455 million dollars 
connected with the Lazarus Group, a hacking collective connected with the North Korean 
government.53  
This was a very unusual enforcement action as Tornado Cash was, in fact, a decentralized mixer 
operating on various blockchains, including Ethereum.54 This meant that the sanctioning was not 
mainly addressed towards an organization or a person, but rather to be sanctioned was the code – 
 
51 World Economic Forum, Pathways to the Regulation of Crypto-Assets: A Global Approach, cit., 22, defines this 
approach as “regulation by enforcement”. 
52 For the press release, United States Department of Treasury, U.S. Treasury Sanctions Notorious Virtual 
Currency Mixer Tornado Cash, Press Release, 8 th of August 2022, https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-
releases/jy0916; The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 91; for a 
description of the Mixer’s functioning see M. Nadler – F. Schär, Tornado Cash and Blockchain Privacy: A Primer 
for Economists and Policymakers, cit., 6. 
53 H. Axelsen – R. Omri, How Should DAOs be Regulated? A New Perspective on Decentralization , cit., 1; for 
another case connected with Tornado Cash see the Frosties NFT as detailed by US Department of Treasury, 
Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 23. 
54 M. Nadler – F. Schär, Tornado Cash and Blockchain Privacy: A Primer for Economists and Policymakers, cit., 4 – 
6; H. Axelsen – R. Omri, How Should DAOs be Regulated? A New Perspective on Decentralization, cit., 1. 
 293 
the smart contract – underlying Tornado Cash.55 Any US person using that code interacts with a 
sanctioned entity, hence, infringing US Sanctions.  
Tornado Cash constitutes the first case of direct sanctioning of informatic code, and, as so, raised 
numerous doubts. 56 Some argued that sanctioning of informatic code equalled to speech 
censorship, with Coin Center – a pro-crypto advisory group – launching a lawsuit on this basis.57 
Furthermore, others argued that Tornado Cash, not being an individual or an entity but a software, 
could not be the object of sanctions and was out of the purview of OFAC’s powers.58   
From our perspective, of great interest is not as much the sanctioning of the entity per se.  
Eminently, the OFAC’s action was not aimed  at ascertaining whether Tornado Cash was an 
obliged entity under the anti-money laundering regulation. The sanctioning of Tornado Cash does 
not bear any direct consequence for the classification of DAOs, also considering that the 
enforcement action was connected with international sanctions which are under a special, partially 
separate discipline.  
What is crucial to our discussion is rather what happened to Tornado Cash’s developer. On the 
10th of August of 2022, just two days after the smart contract had been sanctioned by OFAC, the 
 
55 TRM Labs, Compliance in the second age of digital assets: How crypto compliance programs are evolving in 2023 , cit., 
4. 
56 H. Axelsen – R. Omri, How Should DAOs be Regulated? A New Perspective on Decentralization, cit. 2. 
57 R. Miller, Tornado Cash Sanctions By U.S. Treasury Draw Outrage, Suits From Crypto Community , in Forbes, 26th 
October 2022, https://www.forbes.com/sites/rosemariemiller/2022/10/26/tornado-cash-sanctions-by-
us-treasury-draw-outrage-suits-from-crypto-community/?sh=78a69cd1584c; this was not the only lawsuit 
initiated with other companies claiming the sanctioning infringed crypto-users’ right to privacy, see M. Sun, 
Removing Sanctions on Crypto Mixer Tornado Cash Won’t Be Easy, in The Wall Street Journal, 27th October 2022, 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/removing-sanctions-on-crypto-mixer-tornado-cash-wont-be-easy-
11666891513; for an analysis of the connection between freedom of speech and software development in 
the EU see C. Rueckert, Cryptocurrencies and fundamental rights, cit., 14. 
58 N. De, US Treasury Adds to Tornado Cash Sanctions With North Korea WMD Allegations , in Coindesk, 8th of 
November 2022, https://www.coindesk.com/policy/2022/11/08/us -treasury-adds-to-tornado-cash-
sanctions/. This allegation was rebutted by OFAC that clearly affirmed that the code underlying the DAO 
could be framed as a partnership, association, trust, joi nt venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other 
organization and hence sanctioned see OFAC, Frequently Asked Questions n. 1095 , at 
https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/faqs/1095 ; on the criticalities connected 
with such an action see M. Nadler – F. Schär, Tornado Cash and Blockchain Privacy: A Primer for Economists and 
Policymakers, cit., 14, “Smart contracts are deployed and stored in the form of code on the blockchain. The code for each 
smart contract is public and can be read directly from the blockchain. This makes it trivial for anyone to copy and redeploy a 
new instance of any protocol at a different address. As a result, regulatory actions against a specific smart contract address are 
at best a temporary solution. Redeployments with identical code will force frequent updates of a sanctions list and lead to a  
game of “whack-a-mole.” Slight variations in the code can make the situation even more challenging, as it may be unclear if 
something is a functional copy of a sanctioned protocol or a new implementation that must be treated and analyzed separately”. 
 294 
Dutch Police arrested a 29 years-old man on money laundering charges, he was Alexey Persev the 
developer of Tornado Cash. 59 Since August he has been held in jail with a request for bail being 
denied by a Dutch Court in November. 60 If the Court were to confirm the indictment and 
condemn Persev this would set a ground-breaking precedent. Eminently, Tornado Cash is a 
multipurpose platform whose primary role is to provide privacy to crypto-assets’ users. The mixer 
has been used by hundreds of thousands of users for both nefarious and licit purposes. Tornado 
Cash is, hence, not ontologically criminal. Its services have, however, been used by crimi nals. If 
Persev were to be found guilty of money laundering for actions committed by a software he 
designed, this would de facto nullify the exclusion provided by the FATF. At the same time, it will 
be up to the Court to ascertain and motivate how the actions of the software are causally linked 
with the individual who developed it. It is certainly still too early to ascertain if such a level of 
connection (according to the abovementioned indexes) can be drawn between Persev and Tornado 
Cash.  
Whatever the outcome, the case underlines how a complete exclusion of DAOs from the purview 
of the anti -money laundering regulation is not feasible in the long term. Faced with large scale 
crime, enforcement authorities will have to react, and liabilities will have to be attributed.61 In this 
sense, instead of excluding decentralized arrangements as a statement of principles, it would be 
more useful to devise a clear, certain framework customized to these new governance models. 62 
The lack of any reference to DeFi and DAOs, in both the MiCaR and the Anti-money Laundering 
Package, constitute an important loophole and one the European policymaker should address 
before the introduction of the Package.  
 
59 For more information see the press release by the Dutch Police, FIOD, Arrest of suspected developer of Tornado 
Cash, Press Release, 12th of August 2022, https://www.fiod.nl/arrest-of-suspected-developer-of-tornado-
cash/.  
60 J. Schickler, ‘We Are All F****d’: The Developers of Tornado Cash and the Future of Crypto, in Coindesk, 5th of 
December 2022, https://www.coindesk.com/consensus-magazine/2022/12/05/alexey-pertsev-most-
influential-2022/. 
61 As underlined by H. Axelsen – R. Omri, How Should DAOs be Regulated? A New Perspective on Decentralization, 
cit., 5, regarding the causes of the actions towards Tornado Cash “While the source of the decision is unclear, it is 
to be presumed that the choice of issuing blanket sanctions was made due to a) a lack of appropriate regulation to enable 
proactive review, evaluation, and intervention in a proper format, b) the inability to identify any definite legal subject alongside 
growing concerns by the illegitimate activities conducted using Tornado Cash”. 
62 As underlined by World Economic Forum, Pathways to the Regulation of Crypto -Assets: A Global Approach, 
cit., 22, “ Enforcement actions are necessary to address issues relating to fraud and market manipulation, especially where 
crypto-assets blatantly resemble securities and are being used for explicitly prohibited activities such as money laundering. 
However, this approach is not recommended to build out a framework, as “regulation by enforcement” precludes any meaningful 
discussion of what should and should not be regulated”. 
 295 
 
6. Closing remarks 
 
Decentralized autonomous organizations pose a unique challenge to the legislat ure. The creation 
of headless organizations exclusively governed by code, tests concepts such as control and liability 
key to the sectorial policymaking strategy. The Union’s regulator seems to have decided to ignore 
rather than address such a challenge. The exclusion of any reference to such arrangements both in 
MiCaR and the Anti-money Laundering Package, leaves DAOs in a legal vacuum. At the same 
time, the risks posed by such organizations which, de facto, provide a parallel unregulated market to 
centralized CASPs makes such a strategy untenable in the long term.  
The risk is the emergence of a case -by-case regulation -through-enforcement strategy which 
undermines legal certainty and the orderly development of the market. The United States seems 
to have taken such an  approach by equating centralized and decentralized arrangements and 
focusing on the activity carried out.63 However, such an approach at the European level not only 
raises a problem of fairness but also contradicts the overall strategy underlying MiCaR to provide 
a clear playing field for crypto-companies.  
A way forward could be to go back to the first approach proposed by the Parliament. That 
Proposal, while not transposed in the final version of the Regulation, could still be implemented. 
Eminently, it is the same  MiCa Regulation to require the Commission to draft a report, within 
eighteen months of its entry into force. Among the topics the Report has to cover, MiCaR explicitly 
includes an “assessment of the development of decentralised-finance in the crypto-assets markets and of the adequate 
regulatory treatment of decentralised crypto-asset systems”.64  
It is in light of this  upcoming Report that the French Autorité de Contrôle Prudentiel et de Résolution 
has recently published an, already cited, paper focused on the regulation of Decentralized Finance. 
 
63 See US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, cit., 3. “However, a 
DeFi service that functions as a financial institution as defined by the BSA, regardless of whether the service is centralize d of 
decentralized, will be required to comply with BSA obligations, including AML/CFT obligations. A DeFi service’s cla im 
that it is or plans to be “fully decentralized” does not impact its status as a financial institution under the BSA”. 
64 See article 122, paragraph 2, letter jc. 
 296 
The paper takes a stance very similar to the one of the Parliament’s proposal. Eminently, after 
clarifying that: 
“the regulation of disintermediated finance cannot simply replicate the systems that currently govern traditional 
finance. On the contrary, regulations must take into account the specific features of DeFi”65 
It proposes to assign a legal statute to decentralized autonomous organizations,66 and to, at least 
partially, assimilate CASP and DeFi intermediaries.67 
A more balanced approach to the regulation of DAOs should, hence, pass by two fundamental 
moments.  
First, the legislator should clearly define decentralized autonomous organizations. The definition 
should identify those elements that distinguish a fully decentralized from a partially decentralized 
organization. Second, impose on all DAOs a registration requirement. The registration would 
constitute a moment when the supervisor could signal to the DAO its status as fully or partially 
decentralized. In the former case, the DAO’s developers should be mandated to introduce certain 
by-design elements to guara ntee that the organization, while decentralized, can comply with 
relevant regulations. In the latter case, the supervisor would identify who the individuals or bodies 
with sufficient controls are so to clarify their qualification as covered entities. 
In the presence of such a clear normative architecture, individual responsibilities could then be 
ascribed in case of non -compliance. Particularly, developers , as key players in the operation of 
decentralized software , would be fully aware of their need to introduce engrained compliance 
elements as part of their activity if their DAO is to operate within the Union or suffer the related 
consequences. Eminently, if the values enshrined by th e anti -money laundering regulation are 
fundamental for our society th ere seems to be no reason why code -creation could be allowed to 
circumvent them. At the same time, the developers would always have the possibility to avoid the 
European market. The standard for such an exclusion has already been spelled out by the 
 
65 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 2.  
66 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 3. 
67 O. Fliche – J. Uri – M. Vileyn, “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response?, cit., 39, “It 
would therefore appear appropriate, as a first step, to explicitly extend the scope of the provisions of the MiCA Regulation 
concerning CASPs to DeFi intermediaries”; see also D.A. Zetzsche - R.P. Buckley - D.W. Arner - M.C. van Ek, 
Remaining regulatory challenges in digital finance and crypto - assets after MiCA, cit., 29; The law society, Blockchain: 
Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, cit., 89 
 297 
European Court of Justice , even though in a different setting . In Google versus Commission 
Nationale de l’Informatique et des Liberte ́ s (CNIL)68 the Court clarified that to be exempt from 
European rules the provider has to take sufficiently effective measures to ensure the protection of 
the data subject’s fundamental rights. In this sense, the DAO’s developers could be exempt from 
the registration requirement by introducing engrained processes to avoid investors and customers 
from the Union – by for example screening the connected IP addresses. This would guarantee that 
the Union’s regulation is not perceived as an attempt to globalize the connected strategy and stays 
within its territorial boundaries. 
In sum, simply ignoring a problem does not make it go away. The Regulator has to address the 
new governance structure proposed by DAOs and introduce innovative solutions customized to 
the latter.  
 
68 European Court of Justice, C 507/17 Google v. CNIL, C 507/17, 2019. 
 298 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 299 
Closing Remarks 
 
 
The inexorable dance between law and reality is one of the most fascinating aspects of legal 
scholarship. The law is , at the same time , source and product of the reality it regulates, being 
influenced while influencing its development. 1 Sometimes the law precedes a societal change, 
many times it is the result of one. Maintaining this synergy is key in guaranteeing its continuing 
efficacy.  
Digital technologies are testing this delicate relationship. The speed and depth of the change such 
technologies have spurred are challenging the limits of policymaking. At the same time, the ir 
impact on the physiognomy of the world means their development and conformation is per se a 
normative act , frequently in competition with traditional legislation . Through coding , the 
developer fills machine -readable text with content. In so doing it makes normative choices that 
influence fundamental characters of our pervasively digitalized society. 
Blockchain constitutes an example of such an exercise of legislation through code. The 
introduction of a new governance model for the management of valuable data affects how humans 
interact and organize. Most importantly it affects the architecture of trust  in complex immaterial 
societies. By moving the horizon of what is possible, blockchain challenges the existence of the 
current networked society rooted in trust brokers.  
The present text has analysed one act of this dance  between blockchain and the law : the 
interrelation between crypto-assets and financial monitoring. Bearer s of conflicting interests – 
freedom through privacy the former, security through monitoring the latter – they have struggled 
to find a common ground.  
 
1 As stated by A. Barak, The Judge in a Democracy, Princeton University Press, 2006, 8, “As change in social reality 
is the law of life, responsiveness to change in social reality is the life of the law”. 
 300 
The introduction of a decentralized, disintermediated value transfer system constitutes an 
inevitable challenge for a policy field rooted in centralized, intermediaries. On the one hand, 
crypto-assets, through peer -to-peer transactions, allow to circumvent the anti -money laundering 
monitoring architecture. On the other hand, blockchain-based organizations introduce horizontal, 
code-based governance models  for which the current compliance regulation  - envisioned for 
hierarchical, human-operated organizations - seems unfit.  
The main overarching critique we can move to the policymaker’s strategy so far is a lack of 
imagination. Faced with a ground shifting technology, the legislator has been unable to modify its 
pre-existing tactic. The legislations introduced so far simply extend pre-existing duties to a series 
of intermediaries identified in the crypto -market. The peculiarities of blockchain’s recordkeeping 
structure and governance model have been mostly ignored. Furthermore, the legislator has shied 
away from the most complex issues, as the regulation of DAOs or the treatment of self -hosted 
wallets. This has created a legal vacuum that is being filled by enforcement authorities through a 
case-by-case approach.  
However, momentum seems to be building. As underlined by the Reports published by the French 
and Italian supervisors there is an increasing interest for customized, innovative policies. If the law 
has to be in synergy with reality, it can’t remain rigid in the face of changing circumstances. In 
turn, it has to adapt, and mould to the new reality.  
The present text aims at facilitating such an adaptation process in two synergic ways.  
On the one hand , by providing a complete picture of blockchain’s functioning, historical 
development, intersection with financial monitoring, and policy approaches. Rational choices need 
complete information. This thesis provides scholars, stakeholders, and policymakers with such 
information to foster better informed discussion and legislation.  
On the other hand, by proposing possible avenues for better adaptation and customization. While 
such proposals have already been detailed throughout the thesis, there are three main policy points 
we would like to reiterate as key to a future strategy.  
First, the legislator needs to clearly distinguish between decentralized and centralized crypto-assets. 
The governance structure of the network and/or organization is key in defining the risks and 
opportunities of the specific crypto-asset for anti-money laundering purposes: a centrally governed 
 301 
network is not different from centralized systems: it is in the decentralization of the governance 
that the key innovation  and risk  of blockcahin  resides. Equating centralized and decentralized 
crypto-assets constitutes, hence, a hindrance to customization.  
Second, the transparency of blockchain data should be better exploited . The direct availability of 
financial data should push for a more direct intervention of the supervisor . The current system 
rooted in profiling may be rebuilt as a system based on financial data analysis, through pattern and 
macro-trend analysis software. This way the precision of money laundering investigations would 
be enhanced as the Suspicious Activity Reports would originate from the supervisor and then be 
investigated by the intermediary. Furthermore, t he burden on private companies would be 
alleviated, hence, reducing the barriers of entry to the market and fostering competition. 
Furthermore, given the forthcoming introduction of a Digital Euro, such an approach could be 
piloted in the crypto-assets market to then be expanded in the overall financial market.  
Third, for decentralized arrangements, it is necessary  to move towards a product -like regulation 
by reinforcing the role of software developers and compliance -by-design. In decentralized 
networks/organizations code is king.  It is on the code that the regulator has to act in order to 
guarantee compliance. Not by mandating standards, but by dictating specific goals the code has to 
achieve. If coding is a normative activity, then it should include the goals and norms expressed 
through law by the society. To this end, software developers of decentralized arrangements should 
be included among the C rypto-assets Service Providers. A registration procedure should be 
introduced to guarantee their product (the autonomous software) is compliant with regulations 
and not harmful to society. A clear definition of DAO, along the lines of the one proposed by the 
Parliament, shall be developed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 302 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 303 
Bibliography 
 
 
Books, book chapters, and articles 
 
Accorsi, C. – Brening, R. – Müller, G., Economic analysis of cryptocurrency backed money laundering  in 
Twenty‐Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), 2015 
Allen, S., et al. Design choices for central bank digital currency: Policy and technical considerations, No. w27634. 
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020 
Anderson, P., Cypherpunk ethics. Radical ethics for the digital age, Routledge, 2022 
Antonopoulos, A., Mastering Bitcoin. Programming the Open Blockchain, O’Reilly, 2017 
Armer, P., Computer Technology and surveillance, University of Stanford - Center for Advanced Study 
in the Behavioral Sciences, 1975 
Asmundson, I. – Oner, C., What is money?, in Finance & Development, 49/3, 2012 
Auer, R., Embedded Supervision: How to build regulation in decentralized finance, CESIFO Working Papers, 
9771, 2022 
Axelsen, H. – Jensen, J. – Omri, R., When is a DAO Decentralized?, in Complex Systems Informatics and 
Modeling Quarterly, 31, 2022 
Axelsen, H. – Omri, R., How Should DAOs be Regulated? A New Perspective on Decentralization , in 
AMPLIFY, 35/10, 2022. 
 304 
Azar, C. – Sandén, B. A., The elusive quest for technology-neutral policies in Environmental Innovation and 
Societal Transitions, 1/1, 2011 
Bains, M., Blockchain consensus mechanisms: A primer for supervisors, International Monetary Fund, 2022 
Balaskas, A. - Franqueira, V., Analytical tools for blockchain: Review, taxonomy and open challenges, in 2018 
International Conference on Cyber Security and Protection of Digital Services (Cyber Security). IEEE, 2018 
Barak, A. The Judge in a Democracy, Princeton University Press, 2006 
Bello, A. – Harvey, J., From a risk-based to an uncertainty-based approach to anti-money laundering compliance, 
in Security Journal, 30, 2017 
Berggren, C. – Asplund, J., Identifying and Analyzing Digital Payment Flows Regarding Illegal Purposes on 
the Internet: I Samarbete Med Cgi Och Finanskoalitionen, Independent thesis advanced level, Linköping 
University, 2016 
Bergström, M., The Global AML Regime and the EU AML Directives: Prevention and Control, in King, 
C. – Walker, C. – Gurulé, J. (Eds.), The Palgrave handbook of criminal and terrorism financing law, Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2018, 34. 
Bilotta, N. CBDCs and Stablecoins: The Scramble for (Controllable) Anonymity  in Bilotta, N. – Botti, F. 
(eds.)  The (Near) Future of Central Bank Digital Currencies , Peter Lang International Academic 
Publisher, 2021 
Blandin, A. et al., Global cryptoasset regulatory landscape study , in University of Cambridge Faculty of Law 
Research Paper, 23, 2019 
Blandin, A. et al., 3rd Global Cryptoasset Benchmarking Study, Cambride Center for Alternative Finance, 
2020 
Bohannon, J., The bitcoin bust in Science, 351, 2016 
Bolt, W. – Lubbersen, V. – Wierts, P., Getting the balance right: Crypto, stablecoin and central bank digital 
currency, in Journal of Payments Strategy & Systems, 16.1, 202 
 305 
Boreiko, D. – Ferrarini, G. – Giudici, P., Blockchain startups and prospectus regulation , in European 
Business Organization Law Review, 20, 2019 
Bradford, A., The brussels effect in Nw. UL Rev., 107, 2012 
Brown, D., Cryptocurrency and Criminality: The Bitcoin Opportunity  in The Police Journal: Theory, Practice 
and Principles, 2016 
Brunton, F., Digital Cash. The unknown history of the anarchist, utopians, and technologists who created 
cryptocurrencies, Princeton University Press, 2019 
Budish, E., The Economic Limits of Bitcoin and Anonymous, Decentralized Trust on the Blockchain  in 
University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper, 83, 2022 
Campbell-Verduyn, M., Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global anti-money laundering governance, in Crime, Law and 
Social Change, 69, 2018 
Campbell, R., et al., Distributed Ledger Technologies in the Public Sector: Learnings on the application of 
Distributed Ledger Technologies across international public services and their role in realising Scotland’s full 
potential in a digital world, The Scottish Government, 2018 
Carlisle, D., Virtual currencies and financial crime: Challenges and opportunities , Royal United Services 
Institute for Defence and Security Studies, London, 2017 
Caria, R., Definitions of Smart Contracts: Between Law and Code , in Di Matteo, L. – Cannarsa, M. – 
Poncibò, C. (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Smart Contracts, Blockchain Technology and Digital 
Platforms, Cambridge University Press, 2019 
Carney, M., The Future of Money, Bank of England, 2018 
Cassara, J., Money laundering and illicit financial flows, 2020 
Chaum, D., Security without identification: Transaction systems to make big brother obsolete, in Communications 
of the ACM, 28.10, 1985 
Chaum, D., Achieving electronic privacy, in Scientific American, 267.2, 1992 
 306 
Cocco, L. – Marchesi, M., Modeling and Simulation of the Economics of Mining in the Bitcoin Market , in 
PLoS ONE, 11(10), 2016 
Coelho, R. – Fishman, J. – Garcia Ocampo, D., Supervising cryptoassets for anti-money laundering, Bank 
for International Settlements, Financial Stability Institute, 2021 
Coghlan, E. – McCorkell, L. – Hinkley, S. What Really Caused the Great Recession?, Berkley Institute 
for Research on Labor and Employment Policy Brief, 2018 
Dalla Pellegrina, L. – Masciandaro, D., The risk-based approach in the new European anti-money laundering 
legislation: a law and economics view in Review of law & economics, 2, 2009 
Dalla Pellegrina, L. – Di Maio , G. – Masciandaro, D. – Saraceno, M., Are Bankers “Crying Wolf”? 
Type I, Type II Errors and Deterrence in Anti -Money Laundering: The Italian Case  in Italian Economic 
Journal, 2022 
D’amelio, A. – Soana, G., Blockchain technology to prevent tax frauds and money laundering in the European 
Customs Union: quo vadis?, in Dirittto e Pratica Tributaria Internazionale, 2021 
De Filippi, P. – Loveluck, B., The invisible politics of bitcoin: governance crisis of a decentralized infrastructure, 
in Internet policy review, 5.4, 2016  
De Filippi, P. – Wright, A., Blockchain and law. The rule of code, Harvard University Press, 2018 
De Filippi, P. – Mannan, M. – Reijers, W., Blockchain as a confidence machine: The problem of trust & 
challenges of governance, in Technology In Society, 62, 2020 
De la Dehesa, G., Twelve Market and Government Failures Leading to the 2008–09 Financial Crisis, Group 
of Thirty, 2009 
dell’Osso, A., Riciclaggio di proventi illeciti e sistema penale, Giappichelli, 2017 
Delivorias, A., Understanding initial coin offerings. A new means of raising funds based on blockchain, 
European Parliamentary Research Service, 2021 
Devdeepta, B. – Camerer, C., Trust and Behavioral Economics in F. Krueger (eds.), The Neurobiology of 
Trust, Cambridge University press, 2021 
 307 
Durner, T. – Shetret, L., Understanding bank de-risking and its effects on financial inclusion: an exploratory 
study, Global Center on Cooperative Security Oxfam International, 2015 
Escudero-Pascual, A. – Hosein, I., Questioning lawful access to traffic data, in Communications of the ACM, 
47/3, 2004 
Fatjon, K. – Martino, E. –Pacces, A. M., fintech and The Law and Economics of Disintermediation , 
Routledge Handbook of Financial Technology and Law, 2021 
Ferreira, A. – Sandner, P., Eu search for regulatory answers to crypto assets and their place in the financial 
markets’ infrastructure, in Computer Law & Security Review, 43, 2021 
Finck, M., Blockchains and data protection in the European Union, in European Data Protection Law Review, 
4, 2018 
Finck, M., Blockchain regulation and governance in Europe, Cambridge University Press, 2018 
Findlay, C., Participatory cultures, trust technologies and decentralisation: innovation opportunities for 
recordkeeping, in Archives and Manuscripts, 45/3, 2017 
Fliche, O. – Uri, J. – Vileyn, M., “Decentralised” or “disintermediated” finance: what regulatory response? , 
Banque de France Fintech-Innovation Hub, Paris, 2023 
Forgang, G., Money Laundering through Cryptocurrencies in Economic Crime Forensics Capstones, 2019 
Frick, T., Virtual and cryptocurrencies—regulatory and anti-money laundering approaches in the European Union 
and in Switzerland, in Era Forum, 20/1, 2019 
Gilmour, N., Understanding the practices behind money laundering –A rational choice interpretation,  in 
International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice, 44, 2016 
Gorton, G. – Zhang, J., Bank Runs During Crypto Winter, in University of Michigan Law & Econ Research 
Paper, 2023 
Greenberg, B., Rethinking Technology Neutrality in Minn. L. Rev, 2016, 100 
Grimmelmann, J., All Smart Contracts are Ambiguous, in Journal of Law & Innovation, 2019 
 308 
Gullo, A., Autoriciclaggio e reati tributari, in Diritto Penale Contemporaneo, 2018 
Gullo, A., Nuove Frontiere tecnologiche e Sistema penale: alcune note introduttive, in Diritto Penale 
Contemporaneo Rivista Trimestrale, 2, 2019, IX 
Gullo, A., Compliance, in Archivio Penale, 1, 2023 
Haber, S. - Stornetta, W.S., How to time-stamp a digital document in Journal of Cryptology, 3/2, 1991 
Hacker, P. – Thomale, C., Crypto-securities regulation: ICOs, token sales and cryptocurrencies under EU 
financial law, in European Company and Financial Law Review, 4, 2018 
Haffke, L. – Fromberger, M. – Zimmermann, P., Cryptocurrencies and anti -money laundering: the 
shortcomings of the fifth AML Directive (EU) and how to address them , in Journal of Banking Regulation,  2, 
2020 
Hardy, R. - Norgaard, J., Reputation in the Internet black market: an empirical and theoretical analysis of the 
Deep Web in Journal of Institutional Economics, 12, 3, 2016 
Harlev, M., et al., Breaking bad: De-anonymising entity types on the bitcoin blockchain using supervised machine 
learning, in Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2018 
Hassan, S. – De Filippi, P. Decentralized autonomous organization, in Internet Policy Review, 2, 2021 
Hileman, G. – Rauchs, M., Global cryptocurrency benchmarking study, Cambridge Centre for Alternative 
Finance, 2017 
Hirshman, J. – Huang, Y. – Macke, S., Unsupervised approaches to detecting anomalous behaviour in the 
bitcoin transaction network, Technical report, Stanford University, 2013 
Hobbes, T., The Leviathan, London, 1651 
Hornuf, L. – Kück, T. –  Schwienbacher, A,. Initial coin offerings, information disclosure, and fraud in 
Small Business Economics, 4, 2022 
Houben, R., – Snyers, A., Cryptocurrencies and blockchain. Legal context and implications for financial crime, 
money laundering and tax evasion, European Parliament, 2018 
 309 
Hughes, E., a cypherpunks manifesto, 1993 
Hughes, S., ‘Gatekeepers' Are Vital Participants in Anti-Money-Laundering Laws and Enforcement Regimes 
As Permission-less Blockchain-Based Transactions Pose Challenges to Current Means to'Follow the Money'  in 
Indiana Legal Studies Research Paper, 408, 2019 
Hütten, M., The soft spot of hard code: blockchain technology, network governance and pitfalls of technological 
utopianism, in Global Networks, 19.3, 2019 
Ittay, E. – Gün Sirer, E., Majority is not enough: Bitcoin mining is vulnerable , in International conference on 
financial cryptography and data security. Springer, 2014 
Jakubenko, A. et. al., Anonymization Technologies of Cryptocurrency Transactions as Money Laundering 
Instrument, in KnE Social Sciences, 3, 2, 2018 
Jarvis, C., cypherpunk ideology: objectives, profiles, and influences (1992-1998), in Internet Histories, 2021 
Karasek-Wojciechowicz, I., Reconciliation of anti-money laundering instruments and European data protection 
requirements in permissionless blockchain spaces in Journal of Cybersecurity, 1, 2021 
Kahn, C. – Roberds, W., Why pay? An introduction to payments economics , in Journal of Financial 
Intermediation, 18/1, 2009 
Kolachala, K., et al., SoK: Money Laundering in Cryptocurrencies , in The 16th International Conference on 
Availability, Reliability and Security, 2021 
Koops, B. – Jaap-Henk, H.– Leenes, R., Open-source intelligence and privacy by design, in Computer Law 
& Security Review, 6, 2013 
Koster, H., Towards better implementation of the European Union’s anti -money laundering and countering the 
financing of terrorism framework in Journal of Money Laundering Control, 2, 2020 
Kruisbergen, E.W. – Leukfeldt, E.R – Kleemans, E.R.  - Roks, R.A., Money talks money laundering 
choices of organized crime offenders in a digital age in Journal of Crime and Justice, 5, 2019 
Kuner, C. – Cate, F.  – Lynskey, O. – Millard, C. – Ni Loideain, N. – Svantesson, D., Blockchain 
versus data protection in International Data Privacy Law, 2, 2018 
 310 
Legal, D. – Ortiz Ibarrola , G.  – Blanco, C., Moneda Digital del Banco Central: Implicancias para la 
estabilidad financiera y la politica monetaria en Paraguay, Documentos de Trabajo n. 27 Banco Central 
del Paraguay, 2022 
Leuprecht, C. – Jenkins, C. – Hamilton, R., Virtual money laundering: policy implications of the proliferation 
in the illicit use of cryptocurrency, in Journal of Financial Crime, 2022, 4 
Lennart, A., The non-fungible token (NFT) market and its relationship with Bitcoin and Ethereum, in FinTech, 
1.3, 2022 
Luciano, D. – Prichett, G., Cryptology: From Caesar ciphers to public -key cryptosystems  in The College 
Mathematics Journal, 18/1, 1987 
Lyle, A., Legal considerations for using open source intelligence in the context of cybercrime and cyberterrorism , in 
Open Source Intelligence Investigation: From Strategy to Implementation, 2016 
Maia, G. –Vieira dos Santos, J., MiCA and DeFi ('Proposal for a Regulation on Market in Crypto-Assets' 
and'Decentralised Finance'), Forthcoming article in" Blockchain and the law: dynamics and dogmatism, current 
and future, 2021 
Manes, V., Il riciclaggio dei proventi illeciti: teoria e prassi dell’intervento penale, in Rivista Trimestrale di Diritto 
Penale dell’economia, 2004 
May, T., The cryptoanarchist manifesto, 1988 
Martino, E., Comparative Cryptocurrencies and Stablecoins Regulation A framework for a functional comparative 
analysis, EBI Working Papers, 145, 2023 
MeikleJohn, S., et al., A Fistful of Bitcoins: Characterizing Payments among Men with No Names , in 
Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Internet Measurement Conference, 2016 
Mesquita, B. – Maranhao, S. – Seigneur, J., Enabling KYC and AML verification in DeFi service, Crypto 
Valley Association, Zug, 2022 
Minto, A., The legal characterization of crypto-exchange platforms, in Global Jurist, 22/1, 2021 
 
 311 
Minto, A., Riflessioni sull’applicabilità della disciplina antiriciclaggio ai Non -Fungible Tokens (“NFT”) , in 
Rivista di Diritto Bancario, 1, 2023 
Minto, A. – Skovmand Rasmussen, N., Approaching the Danske Bank Scandal in a “Tragedy of the 
Commons” Perspective: Implications for Anti-Money Laundering Institutional Design and Regulatory Reforms in 
Europe, in European Company and Financial Law Review, 19/2, 2022 
Mitsilegas, V. – Vavoula, N., The evolving EU anti-money laundering regime: challenges for fundamental rights 
and the rule of law in Maastricht Journal of European and Comparative Law, 2 
Moffett, T. A., CFTC & SEC: The Wild West of Cryptocurrency Regulation, U. Rich. L. Rev., 52, 2022 
Mohan, C., State of public and private blockchains: Myths and reality, in Proceedings of the 2019 International 
Conference on Management of Data, 2019 
Morgante, G., Criminal Law and Risk Management: From Tradition to Innovation , in Global Jurist, 16/3, 
2016 
Morrison, R. – Mazey, N. – Wingreen, S., The DAO controversy: the case for a new species of corporate 
governance?, in Frontiers in Blockchain 3, 2020 
Moiseienko, A. – Kraft, O., From money mules to chain hopping. Targeting the finances of cybercrime, Royal 
United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies, London, 2018 
Moiseienko, A., Does international law prohibit the facilitation of money laundering?  in Leiden Journal of 
International Law, 2022 
Möser, M. – Böhme, R.  – Breuker, D., An inquiry into money laundering tools in the Bitcoin ecosystem, in 
2013 APWG eCrime Researchers Summit, 2013 
Muller, W., Anti-money laundering–a short history , in W. Muller  – C. H. K  ̈alin – J. G. Goldsworth 
(eds.) Anti-Money laundering: International law and practice, Wiley, 2007 
Nadler, M. – Schär, F., Tornado Cash and Blockchain Privacy: A Primer for Economists and Policymakers , 
Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis, 2023 
 312 
Nadini, M. – Alessandretti, L. – Di Giacinto, F. – Martino, M. – Aiello, L. – Baronchelli, A., 
Mapping the NFT revolution: market trends, trade networks, and visual features, in Scientific reports, 11,1, 2021 
Nakamoto, S., Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System, 2009 
Nofer, M., et al. Blockchain in Business & Information Systems Engineering , 59/3, 2017 
O’Dwyer, K. – Malone, D., Bitcoin Mining and its Energy Footprint, in, Proceedings of the 25th Joint IET 
Irish Signals & Systems Conference 2014 and 2014 China-Ireland International Conference on Information and 
Communications Technologies (ISSC 2014/CIICT 2014), 2014 
Panetta, P., Crypto-assets or virtual currencies as they were called before it was realized that they cannot perform 
the functions of money in SUERF Policy Notes, 40, 2018 
Pelker Alden, C. – Brown, C. – Tucker, R. Using Blockchain Analysis from Investigation to Trial , in 
Department of Justice Journal of Federal Law and Practice, 69 
Piergallini, C., Autoriciclaggio, concorso di persone e responsabilità dell’ente, in Criminalia, 2015 
Pol, R., Anti-money laundering: The world's least effective policy experiment? Together, we can fix it , in Policy 
design and practice, 1, 2020 
Porat, A. –Avneesh, P.  – Shah, P.  – Adkar, V., Blockchain Consensus : An analysis of Proof -of-Work 
and its applications, 2017 
Rajamäki, J. – Sarlio-Siintola, S. – Alapuranen, N. – Nevanperä, M., Privacy and data protection in open 
source intelligence and big data analytics: Case ‘MARISA’  in Ethics as a resource. Examples of RDI projects 
and educational development, 2020 
Ranganathan, G. – Fernando, X. – Fuqian, S., Inventive Communication and Computational Technologies, 
Springer, 2021 
Reed, C., Taking sides on technology neutrality, in SCRIPTed: Journal of Law, Technology and Society , 4/3, 
2007 
Ross, S. – Hannan, M., Money laundering regulation and risk -based decision-making, in Journal of Money 
Laundering Control, 1, 2007 
 313 
Rousseau, D., et al., Not so different after all: A cross-discipline view of trust in Academy of management review, 
23/3, 1998 
Rousseau, J., Du Contrat Social, ou principes du droit politique  in Collection Complète des Oeuvres, Geneva, 
1789 
Rueckert, C., Cryptocurrencies and fundamental rights, in Journal of Cybersecurity, 1, 2019 
Savona, E. - Riccardi, M., Assessing the risk of money laundering: research challenges and implications for 
practitioners, in European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research, 25, 2019 
Schwarcz, S., Regulating Digital Currencies: Towards an Analytical Framework , in Boston University Law 
Review, 102 
Shahaab, A., et al., Applicability and Appropriateness of Distributed Ledgers Consensus Protocols in Public and 
Private Sectors: A Systematic Review, in IEEE Access, 7/2, 2019 
Shams, H., Legal Globalization: money laundering law and other cases,  in Sir Joseph Gold Memorial Series , 
2004 
Shere, A., Reading the Investigators their Rights: A review of literature on the General Data Protection Regulation 
and open-source intelligence gathering and analysis, in The New Collection, 3, 2020 
Simonova, A., The risk‐based approach to anti‐money laundering: problems and solutions in Journal of Money 
Laundering Control, 4, 2011 
Soana, G., Regulating cryptocurrency checkpoints. Fighting a trench war with cavalry?, in Economic Notes, 2021 
Soderberg, G., Behind the Scenes of Central Bank Digital Currency Emerging Trends, Insights, and Policy 
Lessons, Fintech Notes International Monetary Fund, 2022 
Sompolinsky, Y. – Zohar, A., Bitcoin's underlying incentives, in Communications of the ACM, 61.3, 2018 
Sudipta, B. – Waymire, G. B., Recordkeeping and human evolution, in Accounting horizons 20/3, 2006 
Szabo, N., Smart Contracts, 1994 
 314 
Szabo, N., Smart Contracts: Building Blocks for Digital Markets, 1996 
Thapa, R. – Sharma, P. – Hüllmann, J. – Savarimuthu, B., Identifying Influence Mechanisms in 
Permissionless Blockchain Communities: The Bitcoin Case  in 42nd International Conference on Information 
Systems (ICIS), 2021 
Thompson, M., The Neutralization of Harmony: The Problem of Technological Neutrality, East and West, in 
B.U. J. Sci. & TECH. L., 18/303, 2012 
Tovanich, N. – Cazabet, R., Pattern Analysis of Money Flows in the Bitcoin Blockchain in Complex 
Networks and Their Applications  in XI: Proceedings of The Eleventh International Conference on Complex 
Networks and Their Applications: COMPLEX NETWORKS 2022, 1, 2023 
Tronnier, F. – Harborth, D. - Hamm, P., Investigating privacy concerns and trust in the digital Euro in 
Germany, in Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 53, 2022 
Trozze, A., et al., Cryptocurrencies and future financial crime, in Crime Science, 11/1, 2022 
Tucker, O., The flow of illicit funds. A case study approach to anti-money laundering compliance, Georgetown 
University Press, 2022 
Van Duyne, P. – Harvey, J. H.  – Gelemerova, L. Y., The critical handbook of money laundering: Policy, 
analysis and myths, Springer, 2018 
Van Meerbeeck, J., The principle of legal certainty in the case law of the European court of justice: from certainty 
to trust, in European Law Review, 41, 2016 
Veerpalu, A. – da Cruz Rodrigues e Silva, E., Hitting the White Ball: The Technology Neutrality Principle 
and Blockchain-Based Applications in The Indian Journal of Law and Technology, 15,2, 2019 
Villányi, B., Money laundering: History, regulations, and techniques, in Oxford Research Encyclopedia of 
Criminology and Criminal Justice, 2021 
von Wachter, V. – Regner, J. R. – Ross, O., NFT wash trading: Quantifying suspicious behaviour in NFT 
markets, in Financial Cryptography and Data Security. FC 2022 International Workshops, 2022, 
Werbach, K., The Blockchain and the new architecture of trust, The MIT Press, 2018 
 315 
Xia, Y.A.  – Grover, S. - Lieb, R.C., Keeping PACE with blockchain in ocean transportation , in Supply 
Chain Management Review, 2021, 25 
Zetzsche, D. – Annunziata, F.  – Douglas, W.  - Buckley, R. P., The Markets in Crypto-Assets regulation 
(MiCA) and the EU digital finance strategy in Capital Markets Law Journal, 16.2, 2021 
Zetzsche, D. A. – Buckley, R.P.  – Arner, D.W. - van Ek, M.C., Remaining regulatory challenges in 
digital finance and crypto- assets after MiCA, European Parliament, 2023 
Zou, M., Code, and other laws of blockchain in Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 40/3, 2020 
 
Website pages and web articles 
 
Adler, D., Silk Road: The Dark Side of Cryptocurrency, in Fordham Journal of Corporate and Financial Law 
Blog, 21 February 2018, https://news.law.fordham.edu/jcfl/2018/02/21/silk-road-the-dark-side-
of-cryptocurrency/ 
Bogost, I., Cryptocurrencies may be a path to authoritarianism , The Atlantic, 30 May 2017, 
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2017/05/blockchain-of-command/528543/ 
Browne, R., Man makes last-ditch effort to recover $280 million in bitcoin he accidentally threw out, in CNBC, 
15 January 2021, https://www.cnbc.com/2021/01/15/uk-man-makes-last-ditch-effort-to-
recover-lost-bitcoin-hard-drive.html 
Choo, R., Bitcoin’s Impacts on Climate and the Environment, in State of the Planet (Columbia Climate School 
Blog), 20 September 2021, https://news.climate.columbia.edu/2021/09/20/bitcoins-impacts-on-
climate-and-the-environment/ 
De, N., US Treasury Adds to Tornado Cash Sanctions With North Korea WMD Allegations , in Coindesk, 
8th of November 2022, https://www.coindesk.com/policy/2022/11/08/us-treasury-adds-to-
tornado-cash-sanctions/ 
 316 
Allen-Ebrahimian, B., The man who nailed the jello to the wall , in Foreign Policy, 29th June 2016, 
https://foreignpolicy.com/2016/06/29/the-man-who-nailed-jello-to-the-wall-lu-wei-china-
internet-czar-learns-how-to-tame-the-web/ 
Elliott, F. – Duncan, G., Chancellor Alistair Darling on brink of second bailout for banks , in The Times, 3 
January 2009, https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/chancellor-alistair-darling-on-brink-of-
second-bailout-for-banks-n9l382mn62h 
Ennis, P., An Anatomy of Bitcoin's Great Scaling Debate, in Coindesk, 15th May 2016, 
https://www.coindesk.com/markets/2016/05/15/an-anatomy-of-bitcoins-great-scaling-debate/ 
European Banking Authority, EBA issues Guidelines to challenge unwarranted de -risking and safeguard 
access to financial services to vulnerable customers, Paris, 31 March 2023, https://www.eba.europa.eu/eba-
issues-guidelines-challenge-unwarranted-de-risking-and-safeguard-access-financial-services 
European Central Bank, Eurosystem launches digital euro project , 14 th July 2021, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2021/html/ecb.pr210714~d99198ea23.en.html 
European Central Bank, Digital Euro Project Timeline , 2021, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/digital_euro/shared/pdf/Digital_euro_project_timeline.en.p
df 
Eurogroup, statement on the digital euro project , 16 th January 2023, 
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2023/01/16/eurogroup-statement-
on-the-digital-euro-project-16-january-2023/ 
European Parliament, Cryptocurrencies in the EU: new rules to boost benefits and curb threats, Press Release, 
14th of March 2022, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-
room/20220309IPR25162/cryptocurrencies-in-the-eu-new-rules-to-boost-benefits-and-curb-
threats 
FinCEN, What is Money Laundering?, FinCEN website, https://www.fincen.gov/what-money-
laundering 
FIOD, Arrest of suspected developer of Tornado Cash, Press Release, 12 th of August 2022, 
https://www.fiod.nl/arrest-of-suspected-developer-of-tornado-cash/ 
 317 
Huang, K., Why Did FTX Collapse? Here’s What to Know, in The New York Times, 10 November 2022, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/11/10/technology/ftx-binance-crypto-explained.html 
Handagama, S., Proposal Limiting Proof of Work is rejected in  EU Parliament Committeee vote, in CoinDesk, 
14 March 2022, https://www.coindesk.com/policy/2022/03/14/proposal-limiting-proof-of-
work-is-rejected-in-eu-parliament-committee-vote-sources/ 
Jayachandran, P., The difference between public and private blockchain , in Blockchain Pulse: IBM Blockchain 
Blog, https://www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/2017/05/the-differen- ce-between-public-and-
private-blockchain/ 
Kahn, C., Tokens vs. Accounts: Why the Distinction Still Matters, Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis, 
5 October 2020, https://www.stlouisfed.org/on-the-economy/2020/october/tokens-accounts-
why-distinction-matters 
Leisig, M., My trip Down the Crypto Rabbit Hole in search of the DAO hacker, in Bloomberg, 16 September 
2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-09-16/a-trip-down-the-crypto-rabbit-
hole-in-search-of-the-dao-hacker  
Levy, S., Battle of the Clipper Chip , in The New York Times , 12 June 1994, 
https://www.nytimes.com/1994/06/12/magazine/battle-of-the-clipper-chip.html 
McCaul, E., Mind the gap: we need better oversight of crypto activities , European Central Bank Blog, 5 th 
April 2023, 
https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/press/blog/2023/html/ssm.blog230405~03fd3d66
4f.en.html  
B. Moens – E. Wax, African diplomats can’t open bank accounts in Brussels — and Qatar scandal could make 
things tougher, Politico, 22 nd December 2022, https://www.politico.eu/article/african-diplomats-
cant-open-bank-accounts-in-brussels-and-qatar-scandal-could-make-things-tougher/ 
Mosna, A. – Soana, G., When art goes virtual: what status for collectible NFTs under the current EU Anti 
Money-Laundering regime?, in Eu Law Analysis, 13th of August 2022, 
http://eulawanalysis.blogspot.com/2022/08/when-art-goes-virtual-what-status-for.html 
 318 
Miller, R., Tornado Cash Sanctions By U.S. Treasury Draw Outrage, Suits From Crypto Community, in Forbes, 
26th October 2022, https://www.forbes.com/sites/rosemariemiller/2022/10/26/tornado-cash-
sanctions-by-us-treasury-draw-outrage-suits-from-crypto-community/?sh=78a69cd1584c 
New York Times, Al Capone guilty of tax evasion, 17th October 1931, 
https://archive.nytimes.com/learning.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/10/17/oct-17-1931-al-capone-
guilty-of-tax-evasion/ 
New York Times, The Coin that could wreck crypto , 17 th June 2022, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/06/17/technology/tether-stablecoin-cryptocurrency.html 
Nicolle, E. – Pronina, L., EU Crypto Proposal Seen as De-Facto Bitcoin Ban Fails in Vote, in Bloomberg, 
14th of March 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-03-14/eu-crypto-
proposal-seen-as-de-facto-bitcoin-ban-fails-in-vote?leadSource=uverify%20wall 
Popper, N., Lost Passwords Lock Millionaires Out of Their Bitcoin Fortunes, in The New York Times , 12 
January 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/12/technology/bitcoin-passwords-wallets-
fortunes.html 
Roberts, S. How ‘Trustless’ Is Bitcoin, Really? in The New York Times, 6 June 2022, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/06/06/science/bitcoin-nakamoto-blackburn-crypto.html 
J. Schickler, ‘We Are All F****d’: The Developers of Tornado Cash and the Future of Crypto, in Coindesk, 
5th of December 2022, https://www.coindesk.com/consensus-magazine/2022/12/05/alexey-
pertsev-most-influential-2022/  
Schmahl, A. – Mohottala, S. – Burchardi, K. – Egloff, C. – Govers, J. – Chan, T. - Giakoumelos, 
M., Resolving the Blockchain Paradox in Transportation and Logistics , Boston Consulting Group, 2019, 
available at https://www.bcg.com/it-it/publications/2019/resolving-blockchain-paradox- 
transportation-logistics.aspx 
Sun, M., Removing Sanctions on Crypto Mixer Tornado Cash Won’t Be Easy, in The Wall Street Journal, 27th 
October 2022, https://www.wsj.com/articles/removing-sanctions-on-crypto-mixer-tornado-
cash-wont-be-easy-11666891513 
 319 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Money Laundering, 
https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/money-laundering/overview.html 
United States Department of Justice, Liberty Reserve Founder Sentenced to 20 Years For Laundering 
Hundreds of Millions of Dollars, 6 th May 2006, https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/liberty-reserve-
founder-sentenced-20-years-laundering-hundreds-millions-dollars 
United States Department of Treasury, U.S. Treasury Sanctions Notorious Virtual Currency Mixer 
Tornado Cash, Press Release, 8 th of August 2022, https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-
releases/jy0916 
Vigna, P., Who Is Bitcoin Creator Satoshi Nakamoto? What We Know —and Don’t Know, in Wall Street 
Journal, 7 December 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/who-is-bitcoin-creator-satoshi-
nakamoto-what-we-knowand-dont-know-11638020231  
Wagstaff, J., Mt. Gox bitcoin debacle: huge heist or sloppy glitch?, in Reuters, 28 February 2014, 
https://www.reuters.com/article/bitcoin-mtgox-heist-idUSL3N0LX2SP20140228  
Wintermeyer, L., Bitcoin’s Energy Consumption Is A Highly Charged Debate – Who’s Right?, in Forbes, 10th 
May 2021, https://www.forbes.com/sites/lawrencewintermeyer/2021/03/10/bitcoins-energy-
consumption-is-a-highly-charged-debate--whos-right/?sh=756343e87e78 
 
Reports 
 
Banca d’Italia, Comunicazione della Banca d’Italia in materia di tecnologie decentralizzate nella finanza e cripto-
attività, Rome, 2022 
Bank of England, Central Bank Digital Currency Opportunities, challenges and design, London, 2020 
Bank of England, Financial Stability in Focus: Cryptoassets and decentralised finance, London, 2022 
Chainalysis, The 2022 Cryptocrime Report, February 2022 
 320 
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, Beyond Silk Road: potential risks, 
threats, and promises of virtual currencies, Washington, 2013 
Department of Finance Canada, Updated Assessment of Inherent Risks of Money Laundering and Terrorist 
Financing in Canada, March 2023 
Elliptic, Financial Crime Typologies in cryptoassets. The concise guide for Compliance Leaders, London, 2020 
EU Blockchain Observatory and Forum, Demystifying Non-fungible Tokens (NFTs), 2021 
European Banking Authority, Opinion on “Virtual Currencies”, Paris, 2014 
European Banking Authority , Report with Advice for the European Commission on Crypto ‐assets, Paris, 
2019 
European Banking Authority, EBA Report on the future of AML/CFT Framework in the EU , Paris, 
2020 
European Banking Authority, Guidelines on customer due diligence and the factors credit and financial 
institutions should consider when assessing the money laundering and terrorist financing risk associated with 
individual business relationships and occasional transactions (‘The ML/T F Risk Factors Guidelines’) under 
Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/849, Paris, 2021 
European Banking Authority, Opinion of the European Banking Authority on ‘de-risking’, Paris, 2022 
European Banking Authority, Opinion of the European Banking Authority on money laundering and terrorist 
financing risks affecting the EU’s financial sector, Paris, 2023 
European Banking Authority, Consultation Paper Guidelines amending Guidelines EBA/2021/02 on 
customer due diligence and the factors credit and financial institutions should consider when assessing the money 
laundering and terrorist financing risk associated with individual business relationships and occasional transactions 
(‘The ML/TF Risk Factors Guidelines’) under Articles 17 and 18(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/849,  Paris, 
2023 
European Central Bank Crypto -assets Task Force, Crypto-Assets: Implications for financial stability, 
monetary policy, and payments and market infrastructures, Occasional Paper series no. 223, 2019 
 321 
European Central Bank, Opinion of the European Central Bank on a proposal for a directive and a regulation 
on the prevention of the use of the financial system for the purposes of money laundering or terrorist financing , 16 
February 2022 
European Commission, Report from the Commission on the assessment of recent alleged money laundering cases 
involving EU credit institutions, (COM/2019/373 final), 2019 
European Commission, Communication from the Commission on an Action Plan for a comprehensive Union 
policy on preventing money laundering and terrorist financing (C/2020/2800), OJ C 164, 2020 
European Commission, Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the 
assessment of the risk of money laundering and terrorist financing affecting the internal market and relating to cross-
border activities, COM(2022), 27th October 2022 
European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document Accompanying the document Report from the 
Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the assessment of the risk of money laundering and 
terrorist financing affecting the internal market and relating to cross-border activities, SWD(2022), 27th October 
2022 
European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, Discussion paper on blockchain and smart 
contracts in insurance, Luxembourg, 2021 
European Parliament, Report - A9-0052/2022 on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament 
and of the Council on markets in crypto-assets and amending Directive (EU) 2019/1937, 17 March 2022 
European Parliament, Report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council 
on information accompanying transfers of funds and certain crypto -assets, 6 th of April 2022, Rapporteurs: 
Ernest Urtasun, Assita Kanko 
Europol, Internet Organized Crime Threat Assessment, 2020 
Europol, Policing in the Metaverse. What law enforcement needs to know, 2022 
Financial Stability Board, Regulation, Supervision and Oversight of" Global Stablecoin" Arrangements: Final 
Report and High-Level Recommendations, 2020 
 322 
FinCEN, Application of FinCEN’s Regulations to Certain Business Models Involving Convertible Virtual 
Currencies, 9th of May 2019 
International Monetary Fund, Regulatory Frameworks For Hawala and Other Remittance Systems, 
Washington D.C., 2005 
IMF Staff, Casting Light on Central Bank Digital Currency, International Monetary Fund, Washington, 
2018 
Norges Bank, Central Bank Digital Currencies, 1, 2021 
OECD, Why Decentralised Finance (DeFi) Matters and the Policy Implications, Paris, 2022 
Security and Exchange Commission, Release No. 81207 / July 25, 2017. Report of Investigation Pursuant 
to Section 21(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934: The DAO, Washington, 201 
The law society, Blockchain: Legal and regulatory guidance. Third Edition, London, 2023 
The White House, Technical evaluation for a U.S. Central Bank digital currency system, Washington, 2022 
TRM Labs, Compliance in the second age of digital assets: How crypto compliance programs are evolving in 2023, 
2023 
US Congressional Research Service, Non-fungible Tokens (NFTs), Washington, 2022 
US Department of Treasury, Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance, April 2023 
World Economic Forum, Decentralized Finance (DeFi) Policymaker Toolkit, White Paper, 2021 
World Economic Forum, Pathways to the Regulation of Crypto-Assets: A Global Approach, White Paper, 
2023 
 
Legislation 
 
 323 
Council of Europe, Criminal Law Convention on Corruption, 27th January 1999 
Directive of the European Union, 16th September 2009, n. 110 
Directive of the European Union, 20th May 2015, n. 849 
Directive of the European Union, 27th of April 2016 n. 680 
Directive of the European Union, 25th November of 2016, n. 2366 
Directive of the European Union, 30th May 2018, n. 843 
Directive of the European Union, 23rd October 2018, n. 1673 
European Parliament, Amendments 503 – 838 Markets in Crypto -assets, and amending Directive (EU) 
2019/1937 2020/0265(COD), 3rd of June 2021 
Financial Action Task Force, The forty recommendation of the financial action task force on money laundering, 
Paris, 1990 
Financial Action Task Force, FATF IX Special Recommendations, Paris, 2001 
Financial Action Task Force, International standards on combating money laundering and the financing of 
terrorism & proliferation. The FATF Recommendations, Paris, 2012 
Financial Action Task Force, Virtual Currencies. Key definitions and potential AML/CFT risks , Paris, 
2014 
Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk-based approach. Virtual Currencies, Paris, 2015 
Financial Action Task Force, Concealment of Beneficial Ownership, Paris, 2018 
Financial Action Task Force, Guidance for a risk -based approach. Virtual assets and virtual asset service 
providers, Paris, 2019 
Financial Action Task Force, FATF Report to the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors on 
So-called Stablecoins, Paris, 2020 
 324 
Financial Action Task Force, Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Red Flag Indicators Associated 
with Virtual Assets, Paris, 2020 
Financial Action Task Force, Updated Guidance for a risk based approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual 
Asset Service Providers, Paris, 2021 
Financial Action Task Force, Second 12 -Month Review of the Revised FATF Standards on Virtual 
Assets/VASPs, Paris, 2021 
Financial Action Task Force, Targeted update on implementation of the FATF standards on virtual assets 
and virtual asset, Parigi, 2022 
G7/8 Summits, Economic Declaration, Paris, 16th July 1989 
OECD, Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions , 
17th December 1997 
Proposal for a Regulation of the European Union, 21st of April 2021, n. 0106 
Proposal for a Regulation of the European Union, 20th of July 2021, n. 0241. 
Proposal for a Regulation of the European Union, 20th of July 2021, n. 0239. 
Proposal for a Directive of the European Union, 20th of July 2021, n. 0250 
Regulation of the European Union, 27th of April 2016, n. 679 
Regulation of the European Union, 14th June 2017, n. 1129 
Regulation of the European Union, 31sr May 2023, n. 1113 
Regulation of the European Union, 31st May 2023, n. 1114 
United Nations, UN Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, Vienna, 
1988 
United Nations, United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols Thereto, 
15 November 2000 
 325 
United Nations, United Nations Convention against Corruption, 31st October 2003 
