Teneo
1
Cryptocurrency 
Payments
Will cryptocurrencies provide viable 
alternative payment mechanisms?
Teneo Insights
February 2022
TeneoTeneo
32
Introduction 
Cryptocurrencies are frequently talked about 
synonymously with payments, but is that  
correct? Can cryptocurrencies form the basis 
of viable payments mechanisms? Could they in 
the future? What forms of payments could they 
be beneficial for?
Background
The hype to-date has largely revolved around unbacked cryptocurrencies as an asset class 
dominated by Bitcoin and a handful of other tokens. Speculators buy them, hold them and sell them.
Focus has been on how their value against a fiat currency has performed, much like a commodity. 
But by their very name, cryptocurrencies are seen by some as a currency. As their whole existence 
relates to transactions and records of transactions, it is difficult not to see cryptocurrencies also as a 
payment system.
Cryptocurrencies can be used as a payment mechanism. An individual can make a payment to 
another individual in a cryptocurrency which is recorded on blockchain. Consequently, the key 
question is not whether they can be used as a payment mechanism, but whether cryptocurrencies 
are, or could be, a viable challenger to the existing fiat currency payment systems for anything more 
than a few ad hoc barter transfers.
This is a subject that has no doubt formed the basis of many PhD 
theses. Here, we try to distil the key points into a few pages which 
the layperson can understand. 
In doing so, we make no apologies for sticking to the mainstream 
definitions and mechanisms and ignoring the many variations which 
prove exceptions to those rules and can make the discussion 
overly complicated. Similarly, for any metric associated with 
cryptocurrencies, there is a wide range of answers, depending on 
sources and dates. We have not verified the metrics used as we are 
interested in the orders of magnitude rather than precise figures to 
make the observations below.
As the cryptocurrency world is both relatively new and rapidly 
evolving, there is as yet no definitive lexicon; different authors use 
subtly different definitions. In the appendix, are listed the definitions 
used in this article (drawn from a range of sources).
Teneo2
TeneoTeneo
54
In the fiat currency world there is an array of payment 
mechanisms, many doing something slightly different. 
Frequently, multiple mechanisms are used sequentially 
to complete each payment. Some are domestic/
single currency (e.g. BACS1, Faster Payments, CHIPS2, 
CHAPS3), some regional (e.g. SEPA4) and some 
international/multi-currency (e.g. Visa, Mastercard, Letters 
of Credit). Some of these mechanisms relate to high 
volume retail transactions (e.g. retail card payments and 
electronic payments), whereas others are lower volume 
business-to-business transactions (e.g. international 
bank-to-bank payments and Letters of Credit). Overlaid 
on the actual payments systems lie messaging systems, 
principally Swift 5, which is the conduit for payment 
instructions and therefore forms an integral part of the 
whole solution for inter-bank payments. The processes 
have evolved organically over time and, as a result, are 
fairly archaic. International payments for example, often 
involve a series of intermediary (correspondent) banks 
connected via thousands of bilateral agreements. For 
international trade payments, networks of banks are 
involved to process payments and/or check documents 
and/or guarantee payments.
The complexity of the current solution, particularly 
for international payments, means that payments are 
expensive and take a relatively long time to process. 
For retail card payments, an infrastructure exists both 
domestically and internationally which is broadly fit 
for purpose, if rather expensive; however, in its recent 
report6, the UK Payment Systems Regulator (PSR) stated 
that, “the supply of card-acquiring services does not 
work well for small and medium-sized merchants.” The 
PSR goes on to say, “We will work…to develop remedies 
that … ensures that the market works better for them.” 
There is clearly room for improvement. 
Current situation
1. BACS - Bankers’ Automated Clearing System (GBP)
2. CHIPS - Clearing House Interbank Payments System (USD)
3. CHAPS - Clearing House Automated Payments System (GBP)
4. SEPA - Single Euro Payments Area (EUR)
5. Swift - Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications.
6. Source - https://www.psr.org.uk/publications/market reviews/mr18-1-8-card-acquiring-report-final/ 
Cryptocurrencies as a  
potential game changer
The recent launch of The Bank of London (only the second clearing bank 
launched in the UK in the last 250 years) as a self-proclaimed disrupter 
of the fundamentals of banking, specifically regarding end-to-end 
international banking services, also indicates that change is in the air.
An innovation that revolutionises the industry and delivers far simpler, 
quicker, and cheaper solutions may be overdue. Some argue that 
cryptocurrencies, or rather the underlying blockchain, may form the basis 
of these solutions.
Let’s look at a few of the pertinent factors which have been aired in the 
press over recent months: value volatility, transaction rate, transaction 
time, transaction cost, energy consumption and blockchain size.
Teneo 5
TeneoTeneo
76
I. Value volatility
The first key challenge that cryptocurrencies face 
versus fiat currencies is value volatility. Few of us have 
encountered the chaos caused by hyperinflation, 
but cryptocurrency-based transactions face similar 
challenges. Typically, businesses want to make profits 
on the products they sell. To reduce risk, they usually 
price in the same currency as their costs. If they are 
pricing (or buying) in a different currency, they hedge, at 
a cost, against adverse foreign exchange movements. If 
payments were made in cryptocurrencies, there would be 
a crypto/fiat exchange, and therefore hedging required, 
on every transaction. Given the high volatility, the use of 
hedging instruments is not a viable option. There are two 
possible solutions that address this in some way:
Ia. Stablecoins
Stablecoins are cryptocurrencies which are purportedly 
more stable and secure than unbacked cryptocurrencies, 
on the basis that they are typically tied to the value of a 
fiat currency and therefore address this issue head on. 
Products or services could be priced in fiat and/or a 
stablecoin in the confidence that their values would not 
diverge drastically. However, recurring questions over 
the reality of the collateral behind these does raise some 
concerns; are some merely the latest iteration of a Madoff 
or Wirecard style fraud where the reported underlying 
collateral does not actually exist? Without adequate 
regulatory oversight, we cannot be confident.
Ib. Rapid transactions
The “claimed” speed of cryptocurrency transactions 
means that if one prices in home fiat currency, a 
payment service provider could convert the payment to a 
cryptocurrency at the spot rate at the time of transaction, 
send the payment and convert back to fiat. If this can 
be achieved in a few seconds, the exchange rate risk is 
minimised. 
II. Transaction rate
The credit card payments network, Visa, can process 
32,000 transactions per second (“tps”)7, whilst Bitcoin, 
as a first-generation cryptocurrency, processes at only 
3 tps8. The way a block is added to the blockchain 
(its consensus protocol, proof-of-work), the number of 
transactions it processes at a time (block size, 1 MB) 
and the target time to add a block (10 minutes), are the 
parameters that limit its transaction rate. As blockchain 
technology evolves, new solutions are emerging that 
address the restrictions inherent with Bitcoin. 
Changes are also being made to Ethereum, the second 
largest blockchain, in a series of steps to transition to 
Ethereum 2.0 by June 2022. The target for Ethereum 2.0 
is to increase transaction rates from the current 15-45 tps 
to 100,000 tps. 
Already, third-generation blockchains are emerging with 
claims of significantly increased transaction rates: Nano 
at 1,000 tps and Solana9 at 50,000 tps. These use a 
blockchain and are distributed but use very different 
mechanisms to Bitcoin. In short, although the original 
protocols were unsuited for high volume transactions, 
the emerging protocols address this issue and could, it 
appears, deliver transaction rates which would support a 
viable payments system.
7. Source - Visa fact sheet, two Visa transactions per payment
8. Source - https://www.blockchain.com/charts/transactions-per-second 
9. Source - https://break.solana.com/ 
III. Transaction time
For a cryptocurrency transaction, there are two relevant 
transaction time measures: The time to process the 
transaction (record the transaction in the blockchain) 
and the time to be confident that the transaction will 
not be annulled (confirmation). For Bitcoin this is seen 
as an average of 10 minutes to process the transaction 
and an hour for confirmation. However, 10 minutes is a 
target average; if the fee is low and/or volume high it may 
take longer (and may never happen). Third-generation 
blockchains are emerging with claims of far faster 
transaction times, some purporting to be near-instant 
anywhere in the world (e.g. Nano and Solana claiming 
sub-second settlement times).
Alternative approaches, such as net payments where 
multiple individual payments are aggregated and netted 
off between parties and only the net movement written to 
the blockchain, are also emerging. The Lightning network 
does this for Bitcoin to address the transaction rate and 
time issues mentioned above. These services offer faster 
transaction times but add another layer of infrastructure 
and start to move away from the blockchain concept, 
becoming closer to the existing fiat currency payment 
models. It is worth comparing this to a fiat currency 
transaction. In the UK, a transfer between UK banks can 
be close to instantaneous. 
Faster payments are normally a few seconds (but can 
take up to two hours), 24 hours a day, seven days a 
week. For larger sums or direct debit/standing order 
payments, CHAPS is same day and BACS takes three 
days. On the other hand, international payments can take 
significantly longer, up to five days (especially if between 
smaller banks in smaller countries which are routed via 
several intermediaries) and may require arrangements 
to be put in place prior to the transaction (such as 
nominating advising or confirming banks for Letters 
of Credit) to provide the level of confidence required 
for trade. In that time, there remains an exposure to 
exchange rate risk which may need to be hedged.  
These payments are also affected by weekends and  
bank holidays.
In conclusion, although the first-generation 
cryptocurrencies could not support high volume “retail” 
transactions, the emerging solutions could; and  
for international payments, even the oldest and slowest 
cryptocurrency payment is significantly faster than the 
best a fiat currency payment system can  
currently achieve. 
TeneoTeneo
98
V. Energy consumption
In May 2021, China banned the processing of 
transactions, also known as mining, of Bitcoin on the 
premise that it was too energy intensive. In November 
2021, India announced a similar ban and in January 
2022, Kosovo also banned mining. Was this a ruse or do 
these countries have a point? Let us look at some facts. 
Currently, global Bitcoin mining consumes 300 GWh per 
day10. In terms that we can assimilate, that is one third 
of the UK’s entire electricity consumption. If Bitcoin were 
to process the same number of transactions as Visa, 
VI. Blockchain size
In first-generation distributed networks, each node has 
a copy of the entire blockchain. If we again take Bitcoin 
as an example, the current Bitcoin blockchain is about 
360 GB. Every new block adds 1 MB, and a new block is 
created every 10 minutes. That’s 144 MB per day, 53 GB 
per year. This data must be transmitted between nodes 
and stored across the distributed network. Scaling this to 
handle the volume of transactions needed to make it  
IV. Transaction cost
The fee structures vary significantly, with variable 
percentages (some decreasing with the value of 
transaction), fixed elements and a discretionary element 
(tips) to increase the probability of rapid processing. 
Some of the newer cryptocurrencies have zero 
transaction fees (e.g. Nano); the older ones rather higher 
fees. In general, given the variation, there is no reason 
why newer cryptocurrencies can’t be very competitive 
with fiat payments systems in terms of fees.
it would consume 30 times the electricity consumption of 
the entire globe. So, in a world ever more conscious of the 
effects of climate change, Bitcoin as a volume payment 
method has some significant issues to resolve. But there is 
a recurring theme: Third-generation cryptocurrencies can 
process transactions without consuming vast amount of 
energy by utilising different ways of adding blocks to the 
blockchain (different consensus protocols) which avoid 
multiple parallel processing.
a realistic competitor to the existing fiat payment systems  
is impracticable.
Third-generation cryptocurrencies are trying to tackle 
this head on. Pruning, subscriptions, partitioning and/
or compression can reduce the amount of data each 
node has to store significantly. Viability at scale is a key 
objective of the new entrants.
10. Source - https://ccaf.io/cbeci/index 
Predictions
As Nostradamus purportedly once said, “prediction is difficult, especially about the future,” but let us nail  
our colours to the mast.
The concept is new, progress is being made very rapidly and there appears to be no shortage of investment 
in its development. It is also worth noting that current payments processing, especially internationally, is not a 
straightforward, fast and cheap process with zero risk.
As the first cryptocurrency, Bitcoin gets most of the press. But we should consider it as the Motorola brick phone of 
the cryptocurrency world: a significant innovation, of great academic interest and a catalyst of change, but of limited 
real-world use. The concept as defined in 2008 for Bitcoin does not work for volume transactions for many reasons, 
but there is real promise in the emerging solutions which its creation has spawned. Here are some key questions we 
leave you to consider alongside our predictions:

TeneoTeneo
1110
Who will the future players be?
Will the entities currently processing payments be 
able to develop and/or adopt the new technologies 
rapidly enough to avoid going the way of Kodak? Will 
their value-added services and ubiquity in the market 
mean that they will continue, albeit in a very different 
form? Cryptocurrencies/blockchain may provide the 
infrastructure, but there is more to the end-to-end 
payment solution than the wires. The applications and 
relationships that surround it will be key, and the existing 
players have the edge on these aspects.
The threat to the existing players doesn’t stop with 
the infrastructure providers themselves (e.g. Swift, 
Mastercard, CHIPS). If international payments can be 
made rapidly, cheaply and at low risk, what will happen to 
the trade banks advising and confirming payments? The 
regulatory challenges are significant, but let us for now 
assume that a suitable international regulatory regime 
will emerge in time. The regulators will undoubtably play 
an important role in the wholesale adoption of such a 
payments infrastructure. In parallel, many governments 
are investigating the issuance of Central Bank Digital 
Currencies (CBDCs). Although not cryptocurrencies, we 
may see a merging of technologies and concepts and 
central banks reasserting their dominance of control in 
the payments space.
What about unbacked coins?
Given the speculative nature of unbacked coins, 
we believe the future of payments will be based on 
stablecoins or coins invisible to the user. Nevertheless, 
some regulation will be required before the established 
banks are likely to adopt them in order to avoid another 
Madoff or Wirecard. Unbacked cryptocurrencies may 
continue as a speculative asset class or die as the latest 
manifestation of Tulipmania11.
11. Tulipmania - https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/dutch_tulip_bulb_market_bubble.asp 
Conclusions
It is impossible to conclude with any certainty on the future of payments systems 
and the role cryptocurrencies will play in their development. However, we believe 
there is about to be a fundamental change to payments, the like of which we 
have not seen before. Many of the incumbent large players will be replaced by 
new entrants. A few incumbents may be agile enough to adapt and survive.  
As a result, payments will look strikingly different.
If any of these issues resonate with you, please contact Teneo’s Financial Services team below:
Key Contacts
David Taylor 
Author & Managing Director 
Phone: 07712 776 691 
Email: david.taylor@teneo.com
David Soden
Senior Managing Director 
Phone: 07780 954 883 
Email: david.soden@teneo.com
Stephen Browne
Senior Managing Director 
Phone: 07710 378 740 
Email: stephen.browne@teneo.com
For international payments, the opportunities are 
immense. The current processes are protracted 
and expensive. We can see a wholesale adoption 
of cryptocurrency-based international payments for 
legitimate purposes emerge; however, the volume is 
relatively low, which may hamper progress. Whether this 
change is driven by the emerging technology players 
or whether any of the current players can move rapidly 
enough to remain in the game has yet to become clear. 
For volume transactions there are many more barriers to 
overcome, but the market is huge. 
The technology undoubtably has huge potential. 
There are many players vying to be the first to 
develop blockchains which are truly scalable, secure, 
interoperable, robust and energy efficient. Our guess is 
that they will be successful. 
The focus will move away from the cryptocurrency 
element and towards the utility of the mechanism. The 
actual cryptocurrency used may become invisible to the 
sender and recipient, a transaction being initiated and 
completed in fiat currency and the cryptocurrency merely 
becoming part of the technology solution.
What forms of payments could cryptocurrency be beneficial for?
TeneoTeneo
1312
Bitcoin Bitcoin was the first cryptocurrency and is an example of an unbacked cryptocurrency using blockchain 
across a public network. Its design was set out in a paper written in 2008 by an unidentified person or 
group calling itself Satoshi Nakamoto12. It is the largest cryptocurrency by market capitalisation.
Block A group of transactions which are processed and added to a blockchain simultaneously. The data in the 
block comprises the transaction data, data about the transaction (meta data), a timestamp and a code 
which links it to the blockchain as it was when the block was added.
Blockchain A system, originally defined by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008, in which records of transactions are recorded in 
multiple locations across a distributed peer-to-peer network. Cryptography is used to protect against fraud. 
It is simply a chain of sequential blocks, each one derived from the previous blocks and the block being 
added.
Consensus 
protocol
The integrity of the transactions added to the blockchain is maintained through the consensus protocol.  
As there is no central control, consensus must be agreed by the nodes in the network to prevent  
malicious parties taking over the validation and process fraudulent transactions. There are multiple 
consensus protocols.
Consensus 
protocol - Proof  
of Stake
An increasingly popular mechanism, as it is seen as the “green” approach. Blocks are “forged.” Forgers 
are selected by a pseudo-random election process broadly in proportion to their quantity of holdings in 
the associated cryptocurrency (i.e. the size of their stake). A common factor is Coin Age (number of days 
coins held X number of coins staked); the days held is reset to zero once the node has added a block, thus 
preventing very large forgers to dominate. 
If the network identifies a fraudulent transaction, the forger node will lose part of its stake and its right to 
participate as a forger in the future. If the stake is higher than the reward, the validator would lose more 
coins that it would gain in case of attempted fraud.
Consensus 
protocol - Proof  
of Work
The first consensus mechanism and used by Bitcoin. The nodes on the network try, simultaneously, to be 
the fastest to add a block, a process called “mining.” As only the first node (miner) reaps a reward, speed 
is of the essence, which is leading to a processing power race. This method is under pressure due to the 
enormous and increasing amounts of power used and heat generated across the globe.
As the amount of effort required to obtain a reward is significant, and that would be sacrificed if an invalid/
fraudulent block was mined, fraud is discouraged.
Cryptocurrency Digital currency in which transactions are verified and records maintained on a decentralised system using 
cryptography and which is not controlled or issued by a centralised authority.
Fiat currency A currency backed by a government or other central body, but not linked to any underlying asset/
commodity (e.g. USD, GBP, EUR).
Appendix – Definitions
12. Source - https://nakamotoinstitute.org/bitcoin/
FX Hedge A transaction processed into order to reduce the risk of adverse foreign exchange movements. A hedge 
costs money to process but provides some protection if the exchange rate moves against you.
Proof of Stake See Consensus protocol - Proof of Stake.
Proof of Work See Consensus protocol - Proof of Work.
Smart Contract Contracts written in lines of code and recorded in a decentralised blockchain. The code controls the 
execution of the contract. As they are written to a blockchain they are immutable. They can include health 
and voting records, not solely traditional contracts.
Stablecoin Cryptocurrency where the price is designed to be pegged to real world assets, e.g. fiat money (e.g. 
Tether) or exchanged traded commodity (e.g. Digix Gold Tokens (DGX). Where the collateral is volatile (e.g. 
another cryptocurrency), price stability is achieved through introduction of supplementary instruments and 
incentives, not just collateral. How and whether this is achieved is frequently rather opaque.
Unbacked 
cryptocurrency
A privately created cryptocurrency, the value of which is determined solely by the market.  
For example, Bitcoin.
This publication has been written in general terms and we recommend that you obtain professional advice before 
acting or refraining from action on any of the contents of this publication. Teneo Financial Advisory Limited accepts 
no liability for any loss occasioned to any person acting or refraining from action as a result of any material in this 
publication. Teneo Financial Advisory Limited is registered in England and Wales with registered number 13192958 and 
its registered office at 5th Floor, 6 More London Place, London, SE1 2DA, United Kingdom. © 2022 Teneo. All rights 
reserved.
https://www.teneo.com/service/financial-advisory/
Teneo
14
London
5th Floor,  
6 More London Place 
SE1 2DA
https://www.teneo.com/service/financial-advisory/
